<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-4" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Now take thou up the story, O Goddess of Song, and sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The afflictions and thoughts of the Kolchian maid; for as touching this thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a tempest of wilderment whirled is my soul, that I know not to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether for bitter infatuate passion she fled away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the land of the Kolchian folk, or driven of panic dismay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the king in the midst of his Kolchian princes and men of might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the heroes devising treachery sat through the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his halls, and hot in his soul did the vehement anger rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the trial whose issue he loathed, and he weened not in any wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That unhelped of his daughters had Jason prevailed that task to fulfil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Medea’s spirit did Hêrê with woefullest anguish thrill:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she quaked like a fawn light-footed, the which the hounds’ deep bay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath scared, the while in the tangled depths of a copse she lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For straightway she surely foreboded that nothing concealed should remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her help, and for this should she fill up a cup of uttermost bane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her maids which were privy thereto she dreaded, and filled were her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fire, and the ears of her rang with a sound as of awful cries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ofttimes she clutched at her throat, and moaned in her wretched despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As once and again she rent the tresses of her hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there had the maiden beyond her weird her own death wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By tasting of poison; and Hêrê’s purpose had come to nought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for this, that the Goddess stirred her to flee in her panic dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Phrixus’ sons. So her fluttering spirit was comforted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her breast; and into her bosom in eager haste did she pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All mingled her spell-drugs and poisons, her casket’s deadly store.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she kissed her bed, and her hands on the walls with loving caress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingered: she kissed the posts of the doors; and one long tress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She severed, and left it her bower within, for her mother to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A memorial of maidenhood’s days, and with passionate voice moaned she:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This tress in mine own stead leave I, or ever I go, unto thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother; and, far though I wend, yet take farewell from me!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell thou, Chalkiopê, and mine home!⁠—Would God that the wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere thou cam’st to the Kolchian land, O stranger, had yawned for thy grave!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and down from her eyelids in floods the teardrops ran.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, even as stealeth forth from the house of a wealthy man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bondmaid, whom fate but newly hath torn from her fatherland-soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who never till now hath tasted the lot of bitter toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But unschooled to misery, shrinking in horror from slavery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the cruel hands of a mistress, forth doth she flee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so from her home forth hasted the lovely maid that day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and the bolts of the doors self-moving to her gave way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaping aback at the swift-breathed spell of her magic song.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with feet unsandalled she ran the narrow lanes along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While her left hand gathered a fold of her mantle, to screen from sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her brows and her face and her lovely cheeks, the while with her right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hem of the skirt of her tunic she held upraised from the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftly without the towers that girded the wide burg round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the darkling path in her terror she came; and no man knew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the warders thereof, but past them all unseen she flew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence marked she well to the temple the way, nor unweeting she was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the path, for that oft thereby in her questing she wont to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking for corpses and deadly roots, as the wont is still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sorceress. Ever with quivering dread did the heart of her thrill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Titania beheld her, as upward she floated from heaven’s far bourne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she wandered distraught; and the white Moon-goddess in triumph-scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over Medea exulted, and thus to her heart ’gan say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ha, not I only adown to the Latmian cavern stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor I alone for Endymion the comely with love am afire!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ha, many a time when mine heart was yearning with hot desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did thy strong spells drive me from heaven, that thou in the rayless night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhindered might’st work thy sorceries, deeds that are aye thy delight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now thou too hast part in the same infatuate passion, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a god of affliction hath made this Jason a torment and woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto thee! Pass on, and harden thine heart, be thou never so wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take up thy burden of anguish, thy doom full-fraught with sighs.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she; but swiftly the maid’s feet bare her, as onward she strained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glad was she when the height of the bank of the river she gained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And overagainst her beheld the splendour of fire: nightlong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For joy of the trial triumphant they fed it, the hero-throng.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she lifted her voice clear-pealing: across the darkness she cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the youngest of Phrixus’ children she called from the farther side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Phrontis: and he with his brother discerned Medea’s call;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the son of Aison knew it; and hushed were the heroes all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In amazement, so soon as they knew of a certainty whose was the cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice called she aloud, and thrice, as his company bade reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phrontis in answer shouted, the while with swift-plied oar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heroes were rowing their ship unto where she stood on the shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not yet to the land were they casting the hawsers forth of the ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When lo! to the shore with feet light-bounding did Jason leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the height of the deck-planks; and after him Phrontis to land hath sprung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Argus, the children of Phrixus. About their knees she clung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clasping them round with clinging hands, and Medea cried:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Deliver me, O my friends, the hapless!⁠—yea, and beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save from Aiêtes yourselves: for all hath been brought to light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, all: and there cometh no help therefor. But speed we our flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In your ship, ere the king shall have mounted his swift-horsed car for the chase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Fleece of Gold will I give you: with slumber-spells will I daze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its serpent warder. But thou in thy comrades’ presence take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Gods to witness the vows which thy lips, O stranger, spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto me: neither make me, when hence I have fled and afar from my land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An outcast dishonoured, as one by whose side no kinsman doth stand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In anguish she spake: but with gladness exceeding the heart ’gan stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aison’s son. At his knees as she bowed, he uplifted her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gently, and straightway embraced her, and spake to her words of cheer:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lady, let Zeus himself the Olympian my troth-plight hear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let Hêrê of Wedlock, the Bride of Zeus, in witness be near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I surely will make thee mine own true wife mine halls within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whensoever returning again unto Hellas-land I shall win.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and her hand with his right hand caught in the clasp of love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did the maiden bid them to speed to the sacred grove</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swift ship straightway, that so, ere Aiêtes was ware, they might seize</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear away in the darkness of night the Golden Fleece.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even with the word was the deed performed by the eager men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they took her aboard, and forth from the land their galley then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrust they: with plashing loud the pinewood oars ’gan strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hands of the chieftains. But backward darting the maiden again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outstretched her despairing hands to the shore: but Jason spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comforting words, and restrained her whose heart went nigh to break.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the hour when men from their eyes the fetters of slumber cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even huntsmen, which put their trust in their hounds, nor ever waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In slumber the end of the night, but the light of the sun they prevent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest, ere they be forth, he efface the track of the beasts, and the scent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the quarry, with stainless-gleaming shafts down-smiting thereon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then with the maid from the galley forth stepped Aison’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a grassy sward. The Couch of the Ram men call that spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that there he rested first his knees with toil overwrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he bare on his back the Minyan scion of Athamas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anigh it all smoke-besmirched the base of an altar there was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the Aiolid Phrixus to Zeus the Preserver of Exiles did build,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Golden Marvel offered thereon, as, gracious-willed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hermes bade, in the way as he met him. The hero-crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There set them aland, as Argus gave them counsel to do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So these twain fared by the pathway that led to the sacred grove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking the oak-tree marvellous-huge, mid the branches whereof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was hanging the Fleece, like a morning-cloud that flusheth red</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the beams of the sun as he riseth up from his ocean-bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But barring their path did the neck exceeding long uprise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the serpent glaring upon them with keen unsleeping eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they came; and in awful wise did he hiss; and the banks of the flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far-stretching echoed, and sighed the measureless depths of the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people that dwell from Titanian Aia far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Kolchian land by the outfall of Lykus heard, even they⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lykus, which parteth his flow from Araxes’ rattle and roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blendeth with Phasis his sacred stream, and these twain pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their mingled waters in one to the dark Caucasian sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young mothers in terror awoke, and their hands in agony</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast they around their babes new-born, in their arms which slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the tiny limbs with the horror of that hiss thrilled and leapt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as when, above a smouldering faggot-pile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eddies of smoke roll upward in murky coil on coil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One after another swiftly ever on high they spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From beneath in wavering wreaths uprushing and hovering;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so that monster was writhing and heaving the endless trail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his coils overlapped with the myriad-ranged harsh-crackling scale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, even as he writhed him, came before his eyes the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sweet voice summoning Sleep, most mighty of Gods, to her aid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the monster to cast his spell: and to her that through night’s deep mirk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paceth, the Underworld Queen, she cried to speed her work.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And followed her Aison’s son in fear: but, lulled by the song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The serpent by this was relaxing the thorn-ridge endless-long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his Titan-spires, and was lengthening out his coils untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as a dark wave over a sluggish sea slow-rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dumb and a thunderless surge: yet still, in despite of the spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His grisly head he uplifted on high, with purpose fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To encompass the twain with the grip of his murderous jaws: but she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dipping the newly-slivered spray of a juniper-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her mystic brewis, singing⁠—singing⁠—rained down fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untempered spells on his eyne, and about him and o’er him was cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleep by the drug’s strong fume; and his dragon-jaws he laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the earth in the selfsame place, and his endless coils through the shade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the myriad stems of the forest stretching afar were unrolled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from the oak-tree the hero snatched the Fleece of Gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the maiden’s bidding. Unswerving all the while she stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smeared on the head of the monster her unguent, till Jason bade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till himself said, “Turn we again, and fare to the galley aback.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then left she the War-god’s grove, where the vast shades brooded black.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as a maiden may catch on her vesture of delicate thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The light of the mid-month’s moon, when she saileth the heavens overhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her high-roofed bridal bower, and her heart in her breast is aglow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy that her eyes behold that lovely splendour; so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exulting did Jason the mighty Fleece in his hands upraise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And suddenly over his forehead and over his sunburnt face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From its shimmering flocks there rested a flush that flamelike shined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And great as the hide of a yearling steer, or the fell of a hind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is callèd a brocket in speech of the hunters of the wold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So great was its length and its breadth all overtufted with gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy with flocks thick-clustered; and ever as onward he passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From under his feet the earth an answering sheen upcast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now veiling the man’s left shoulder the gleaming burden shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down-trailed from the height of his neck to his heel as he trod, and anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did he gather it up in his clutch, for that sorely he feared the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest a God or a man might meet him and wrest from his hands the spoil.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Dawn over the earth was spread, and now those twain returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their company. Marvelled the youths to behold how the great Fleece burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A splendour as lightning of Zeus. Upsprang they, for eager-keen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was each man to touch the glory, and clasp it his hands between.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the son of Aison withheld them: a mantle thereover he threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New-woven, to hide it. To Argo’s stern the maiden he drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he seated her there; and he spake to the heroes all his rede:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No longer forbear now, friends, to your fatherland homeward to speed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the emprise now for the which we dared the peril and pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a desperate voyage, toiling with bitter travail and strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this by the maiden’s counsels lightly hath been fulfilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the home-land her will I bring⁠—yea, so herself hath willed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My bride true-wedded: but ye, forasmuch as the saviour she is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all Achaia-land, and of your own souls, I wis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save her; for surely, I ween, will Aiêtes with all his array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go forth, with intent from the river seaward to bar our way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now down through the ship, man ranged after man in order arow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall the half of you sit at the oars to toil, that the half of you so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May uplift the ox-hide shields for a fence from the darts of the foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guarding our home-return. Lo, now in our hands do we bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our children, our fatherland dearly-beloved, and the silver hair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our sires; and with this our venture the fate of Hellas is bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or to reap confusion of face, or a glory far-renowned.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and donned his harness of fight; and shouted the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wondrous-eager souls; and forth of the scabbard he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sword, and the ship’s stern-hawsers he severed in twain with the brand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hard by the maiden, in armour clad, hath he taken his stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Ankaius the helmsman, and flashed the oars as the good ship raced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to speed her forth of the river they strained in desperate haste.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But by this to Aiêtes the king and to all the Kolchians known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Medea’s love, and revealed were all the deeds she had done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they swarmed to the gathering-place in their harness of battle, untold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the crested waves of the sea by the stormy wind uprolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as leaves of the forest myriad-branched that earthward sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the month of the fall of the leaf⁠—whereof who telleth the tale?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So numberless these went pouring the banks of the river along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With frenzy of shouting: on fair-fashioned chariot amidst of the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glorious Aiêtes showed above all with his steeds, the gift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Sun-god; for even as the blasts of the wind were they passing-swift.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his left hand his shapely-rounded buckler on high did he rear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a pine-brand exceeding huge in his right: and his giant spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside him rose up straight and high; and the reins of the car</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Absyrtus grasped in his hands. But Argo by this was afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleaving the brine, to the stalwart oarsmen’s stroke as she leapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the down-rushing flood of the mighty river seaward swept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the king in a madness of anguish uplifted his hands to the sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Sun and to Zeus, the beholders of evil deeds, did he cry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he turned him to all his host, and he shouted terribly:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Except ye lay hands on the maiden, and seize, or on land it may be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or finding their ship yet tossed on the swell of the open sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring her, that so I may glut my fury, wherewith I burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For revenge, on your own heads all these things shall light: ye shall learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The measure of all my wrath and all my revenging then.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake Aiêtes: on that same day did the Kolchian men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Launch forth their galleys, and cast in the ships their tackling-array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the selfsame day sailed forth on the sea: thou wouldst not say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so mighty a host was this of ships, but in crowd on crowd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nations of bird-folk over the sea were clamouring loud.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Swiftly the wind blew, even as Hêrê the Goddess planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the end that Aiaian Medea might reach the Pelasgian land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right soon, that in her might the bane of Pelias’ house be found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the men with the third day’s dawn the hawsers of Argo bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Paphlagons’ strand, where the sea and the waters of Halys meet:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Medea bade them to land, and with sacrifice to entreat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hekatê’s grace. What things for that incantation of hell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden prepared and offered, thereof let no man tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let my spirit enkindle me not to darken therewith my lay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, awe refraineth my lips. Yet the altar on that far day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Goddess upreared by the heroes hard by the breaking sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet standeth, a sign to be seen of the children of days to be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Straightway to Aison’s son, and the heroes withal, came back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembrance of Phineus, and how that he spake of another track</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be found from Aia: howbeit to all was his meaning dim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Argus arose and spake, and eager they hearkened to him:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“We may win to Orchomenus, whither the prophecy bade us fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the seer unerring, whose guests in the days overpast ye were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For another voyaging-course there is, a sea-path shown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the priests of the Deathless, the sons of Thêbê, Tritônis’ town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not yet was the star-host, that whirl round heaven their chariots of fire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not yet of the sacred Danaan race, though a man should inquire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aught might he hear. Apidanian Arcadians alone on the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwelt⁠—the Arcadians which lived, or ever the moon had birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the mountains acorn-sustained, it is told. No sceptred hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Deukalion’s glorious line ruled then the Pelasgian land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the days when men called Egypt, the fruitful land of corn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Morning-land, the mother of peoples elder-born.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of Trito her fair-flowing river was named, of whom all the plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Morning-land is watered; for never descendeth the rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Zeus thereupon: from his floods the stintless harvests spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that land, say they, a certain king went journeying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All Europe and Asia through, by the strength and the prowess made bold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the aweless might of his people, and cities he builded untold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whithersoever he came, whereof some remain to this day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some not, for that long generations since then have passed away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Aia abideth unshaken: a nation the sons’ sons yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abide of the men whose dwelling in Aia the hero set.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And graven memorials these men keep of their fathers’ days</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon pillars, whereon is every bourne and all the ways</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the watery waste and the land, as ye journey on all sides round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now a river, the uttermost horn of the Ocean, therein is found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide and exceeding deep, that a dromond may sail the same.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far on their chart have they traced it, and Ister they named its name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And awhile through the boundless tilthland it cleaveth its way afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As but one; for beyond the North-wind’s blasts its fountains are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where midst the Rhipaian mountains it bursteth forth in thunder:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But so soon as it parteth the Thracian and Scythian marches asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is it cleft in twain, and the half of its flood it sendeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hereby to the sea Ionian, the residue southward trendeth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a deep gulf up from the sea Trinacrian northward bendeth⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sea which lieth beside your land, if the tale be true</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That forth of your land Acheloüs the river fleeteth thereto.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he; and sent by the Goddess a happy portent came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all they looking thereunto hailed it with joyful acclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a sign that their voyaging-track was this: for a splendour in heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone in a far-stretching furrow to point where their path was given.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there glad-hearted they left the son of Lykus, and fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wide-spread canvas over the sea, looking back as they sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Paphlagonian Hills, neither rounded Karambis-head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as the breezes held, and the heavenly fire’s long gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone ever before, till they won unto Ister’s mighty stream.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the rest of the Kolchian host, when nothing their search availed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth through the Crags Dark-blue from the Pontus-sea had sailed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But others went to the river, whose chieftain Absyrtus was;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unto the Fair Mouth turning aside from the sea did he pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prevented them, mooring beyond the neck of land that ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Athwart the innermost gulf of the sea Ionian.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For around the island Peukê the waters of Ister pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An isle three-cornered, whose breadth looketh out on the breakers hoar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the narrow point up-stream, and about it the flood’s outfall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is cleft in twain; and the one the passage of Narex they call;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that on the nether side the Fair Mouth: even thereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Kolchian array with Absyrtus anchored hastily;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the heroes sailed far up to the uttermost spur of the isle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the field-abiding shepherds forsook in the meadows the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flocks without number, for dread of the ships; for they weened that these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were beasts that had risen out of the monster-teeming seas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For never on galleys that ride the waves had they gazed ere then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor they, nor the Thracian Scythians, nor yet the Sigynian men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet the Graukenian folk, nor the Sindian tribes that abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round Laurium now, on the steppes of the wilderness boundless-wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when they had run by Angurus, the Kauliac cliffs withal⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar from Angurus the mountain riseth their long rock-wall⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around which Ister divideth, and this way and that way run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His rushing waters, and out to the Laurian plain they won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then forth to the Kronian Sea the Kolchians came, and beset</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the outgoings thereof, that the quarry might ’scape not their net.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Argo, descending behind them the flood, passed forth hard by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where islands twain, the Brygêïan Isles of Artemis, lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now it fell that in one of these a hallowed temple stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the other the heroes, avoiding Absyrtus’ multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Landed, seeing the foe had left those twin isles void</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their host, for awe of the Daughter of Zeus; but all beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thronged with the Kolchian men, barred every seaward way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, too, of their host upon other isles hard by left they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which betwixt the Nestian land and Salanko the river lay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There, being few against many, that day had the Minyan men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yielded in that grim fight to their foes: howbeit ere then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made they a covenant, fain that the strife should abide unstriven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Golden Fleece⁠—forasmuch as Aiêtes’ pledge had been given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the heroes therefor, if the ordeal they dared, and accomplished the toil⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That prize should they keep, as lawfully won; yea, whether their guile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or their strength in the king’s despite had prevailed that splendour to win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as touching Medea⁠—for stubborn the wrangling waxed herein⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Lêto’s Daughter, aloof from the throng, should they give her in ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till her cause should be judged of a king, some justice-dispensing lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether he doom that they yield her up to return to the home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her father, or doom her to Hellas-land with the heroes to come.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now so soon as the maiden mused upon all things purposed of these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With keen-thrilling anguish her heart was tempest-tossed without cease:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway she called forth Jason aloof from his comrades alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she led him away and away, till far apart were they gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There uttered she speech all broken with sobs, as she looked in his eyes:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Aison’s son, what purpose is this that now ye devise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touching me? Hath thy triumph brought utter forgetfulness unto thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou nothing regard thy promises, all that thou spakest to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In stress of thy need? Where now are the oaths of the Suppliants’ King</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zeus?⁠—and thine honied promises, whither have these taken wing?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By reason of these, in unseemly wise, with passion unshamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I forsook my fatherland home, and the glory of halls far-famed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and my parents⁠—all that was most unto me; and I sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far over the sea alone, where the plaintive sea-mews wail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because of thy trouble, that I might redeem from destruction thy life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To accomplish the fire-bulls’ quelling, the Earth-born giants’ strife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and the very Fleece, for the which ye had sailed to our shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All by my folly ye won. Foul shame thereby did I pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On womankind! Wherefore, I say, as thy daughter, thy wife, I stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and thy sister, who follow thee back unto Hellas-land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh now with purpose of heart stand by me, neither forsake me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar and forlorn of thee, to the gathering of kings to betake thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in any wise save me; and sealed abide thy solemn vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which is plighted, by justice of man and of God; or else do thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shear, of thy pity, this my throat with thy falchion through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so for my frenzied love I may reap the guerdon due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O heartless!⁠—if that he doom that my brother’s prey I remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This king unto whose stern judgment ye now would commit, ye twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your cruel covenant, how shall I come to my father’s sight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With glory in sooth!⁠—what revenges, what devilish torment will light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon me!⁠—what agony-cup shall I drain for the dreadful deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I wrought! Oh, never think that in bliss your return shall speed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er may the World’s Queen, bride of Zeus, accomplish for thee⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She in whom thou delightest⁠—this! Then may’st thou remember me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When anguish-racked: may the Fleece like a dream fleet away from thine hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the wind to the netherworld-gloom! Be thou chased from thy fatherland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the Spirits of Vengeance for me, even after the measure of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That through thy betrayal I suffered! That earthward my curses should fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unaccomplished, shall God forbid; for a great oath thou hast transgressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O ruthless! Not long, for all this covenant-plight, at rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From your troubles, on me shall ye wink with the eye, to make me your jest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, seething with vehement rage: fierce-eager was she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fire the ship, and to hew it in pieces utterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to hurl herself mid the ravening flame. But, half-adread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Jason essay to soothe her with gentle words; and he said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah, lady, forbear: me too this covenant liketh not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only a little delay from the strife herein have we sought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a host of foes like a cloud of fire is on every side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy sake. Yea, and the folk which in this same land abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be eager to help Absyrtus, that back again to the hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy sire he may hale thee like to a captive battle-thrall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit should we in hateful destruction all be slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we closed in the fight with these; and therein were bitterer pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If we leave thee a prey no less unto these, and withal we die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now shall this covenant find us a path of guile, whereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To destroy him. The folk of the land shall not be fain as before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To favour the Kolchians in thee, when their king shall be with them no more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He who forsooth as thy champion and brother doth claim thee to-day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea also, I will not refrain me from matching my might in the fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Kolchian men, if then they bar mine homeward way.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For her comfort he spake; but with deadly words did she make reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Give heed now:⁠—it needs must be, when peril and shame are nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we likewise counsel thereafter. Distraught I was at the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mine error, and god-misguided accomplished desires accurst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do thou be my shield from the Kolchian spears in the toil of the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will beguile this man to lay in thine hands his life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He shall come: and with dazzling gifts of welcoming win thou his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I haply persuade the heralds to hold themselves apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And draw him alone unto me to hearken the thing I would say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then thou, if this deed be good in thy sight⁠—I say not nay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slay him, and meet thereafter the Kolchian men in the fray.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even so these twain consented, and twined the net of guile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Absyrtus; and many a gift of welcome prepared they the while.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with these a sacred mantle, a woven crimson flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave they, Hypsipylê’s gift. The Graces had fashioned the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the God Dionysus in sea-girt Dia; and he on his son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thoas, bestowed it; and this at his fleeing Hypsipylê won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, with many a lovely marvel, that parting-gift wrought fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gave unto Aison’s son. Thine hands would linger there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touching, thine eyes beholding, ever unsatisfied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a scent ambrosial breathed therefrom, since that sweet tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the King Nysaian himself thereon lay down to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wine and with nectar flushed, lay clasping the beauteous breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the maiden the daughter of Minos, who sailed from the Knossian land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Theseus, and there was forsaken of him upon Dia’s strand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Medea wrought on the heralds⁠—for subtlest speech did she frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To beguile them⁠—when unto the Goddess’s temple Absyrtus came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the covenant’s sake, and when night’s black pall should around them be rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To depart, that with him she might plot to take that Fleece of Gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the heroes, and bearing the prize with him to fare again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Aiêtes’ halls, for that Phrixus’ sons by force had ta’en</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had given her unto the strangers a captive to bear overseas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so she beguiled them; and wide through the air and afar on the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast she her witchery-spells, of might to draw from his lair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the trackless mountain the wild beast, lurk he how distant soe’er.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, ruthless Love, great grief, great curse to the sons of earth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thee fell feuds, and anguish-moans, and laments have birth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thee therewithal unnumbered woes as a flood forth burst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Gainst the sons of our foes, thou god, array thee battle-athirst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when thou didst thrill the heart of Medea with madness accurst!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But how, when to meet her he came, by an evil doom did she quell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Absyrtus?⁠—for this thing next must the song in order tell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the heroes had left the maiden on Artemis’ island-strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the covenant, ran they their ships in a several place aland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Kolchians and Minyans. Then to his ambush did Jason hie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Absyrtus to lie in wait, and for them of his company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now that hero, deathward-beguiled by their promise dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the swell of the sea in his galley swiftly sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And under the mirk night stepped on the Isle of the Holy Place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And alone fared onward to meet his sister face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to try her with words⁠—as though some tender child should try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wintertide torrent, when strong men may not cross thereby!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If perchance she would weave him a treachery-snare for the stranger-crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now were they making agreement for all these things, they two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When suddenly out of the gloom of his ambush the Aisonid leapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifting his naked sword in his hand: and the maiden swept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her veil o’er her eyes, as she turned them away for averting of guilt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she might not behold the blood of her slaughtered brother spilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him, as a flesher felleth a strong-horned bull, even so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did he mark him, and smite him, hard by the fane which long ago</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Brygians which dwelt on the mainland-shore unto Artemis wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the porchway thereof on his knees he fell; and the hero caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his hands, as he gasped his latest breath, the dark-red tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it welled from the gash, and he hurled that murder-rain, that it dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crimson her silver veil and her robe, as she shrank aside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with swift side-glance the all-quelling Vengeance-fiend espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her pitiless eye beheld that murderous deed they had done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the ends of the dead man’s limbs then severed Aison’s son:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice licked he the blood from the sod, thrice spat it again to the dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the slayer must do that atonement be made for the treachery-thrust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then hid he the clammy corpse in the ground, where unto this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the land of Absyrtan men be those bones lapped in clay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the heroes the while gazed forth through the night, and beheld where shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glare of a torch which the maiden upraised for a sign to set on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And alongside the Kolchian galley they laid their ship straightway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they slaughtered the crew of the Kolchians, even as wild hawks slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tribes of the woodland cushats, or lions of the wold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive huddled a mighty flock, when they leap to the midst of the fold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, of them all was there none that escaped, but on all that throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as flame making havoc they rushed; and it seemed o’erlong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere Jason, afire for their helping, came: no need of his aid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had they; nay rather for him by this were their hearts afraid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter they sat them down to devise for their voyaging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep counsel; and, yet as they mused, stole into the midst of the ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden. And Peleus resolved him the first, and he spake the thing:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now call I upon you to enter up into the ship, and to row</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleaving your sea-path onward, while yet it is night, and the foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tarry; for when with the dawn they shall see and be ware of their plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no man, I trust me, who, bidding them follow the track of your flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall win them to hearken a word; but, as folk of their king bereft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grievous dissension shall these, and with faction, asunder be cleft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore our path henceforward⁠—when sundered our foemen are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each from his fellow⁠—to Hellas home shall be easier far.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and the young men praised the counsel of Aiakus’ child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they entered the ship with haste, and they grasped the oars, and they toiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without rest, till they won by the sacred isle of Elektra⁠—the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the eyots is highest⁠—and so to the river Eridanus came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the Kolchians, so soon as the doom of their murdered king they knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eager were they for Argo to search and her Minyan crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all the Kronian Sea: but Hêrê held them back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By terrible lightnings that flashed evermore from the cloudy rack,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they shuddered at last when they thought on their homes in Kytaia-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quailed for Aiêtes’ wrath, and a king’s avenging hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So went they ashore, and abiding homes in the land they made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far-scattered; for some set foot on the selfsame isles where stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heroes;⁠—the name of Absyrtus yet do the islanders bear;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the river Illyrican’s darkling depths did others rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tower-girt burg where the tomb of Harmonia and Kadmus doth stand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Enchelean men do they dwell: and some in the mountain-land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amidst of the ridges abide which the Crests of Thunder they call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the day when crashed the thunders of Zeus their souls to appal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they crossed not over the flood to the isle, on the heroes to fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now these, when they weened that the home-return’s grim peril was past,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had gotten so far on now, made Argo’s hawsers fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the strand Hyllaian; for thick in the river the eyots lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a troublous track they make it for them that would voyage thereby.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the folk Hyllaian devised not their hurt, as in that past day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, rather they did their endeavour to help them forth on their way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they won for their guerdon the mighty tripod Apollo gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For tripods twain had Phœbus bestowed, far over the wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be borne in the Quest of Aison’s son, when to Pytho’s shrine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wended, to ask touching this same voyage the purpose divine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this was their weird, that in whatso land those tripods were placed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That land no foes breaking in thereupon should prevail to waste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore in that land yet by Hyllê’s pleasant town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That tripod abideth, hidden beneath the earth deep down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the talisman so may continue of men unseen for aye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit their king no longer alive in the land found they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Hyllus, whom Melitê lovely-faced unto Herakles bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Phaeacia-land; for of old to the halls did the hero fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Nausithous and Makris, the nurse of the God Dionysus: defiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the blood of his children, he came to be cleansed. There saw he the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aigaius the river, even the Naiad Melitê:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he loved her, and humbled the maid, and Hyllus the strong bare she</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Phaeacia-land. And he dwelt in Nausithous’ halls awhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being yet but a little one: but he left thereafter the isle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, as waxed within him his might, he brooked no longer to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At a king’s beck there in the island that owned Nausithous’ sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he fared to the Kronian Sea, and a host of her sons forth led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Phaeacia-land: yea, also the king his journeying sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero Nausithous. There did he stablish his home, and was slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defending his kine from the Mentors, the rovers of the main.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, Goddesses, tell how Argo’s wondrous ensign came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without this sea, by Ausonia-land, and the isles men name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The “Long Row,” lone sea-cradles that nurse a Ligurian seed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How stood clear forth mid-sea⁠—what strong constraint, what need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thitherward led her, what breezes they were that wafted her speed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas, I ween, when Absyrtus had fallen in mighty overthrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the wrath of Zeus, the King of the Gods, for their deed was aglow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet he ordained the transgressors to cleanse them of murder’s stain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the counsels of Circê, and so, after measureless travail and pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home to return; yet this of the princes did no man know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they sped, when the land Hyllaian sank on the sea-marge low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar; and they left behind them the isles that were thronged erewhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Kolchians, isle Liburnian ranged in the sea after isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Issa, Dyskeladus, then Pityeia’s lovely shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So passed they these, and overagainst Kerkyra they bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was it Poseidon caused Asôpus’ daughter to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When by reason of love he wafted Kerkyra the beautiful-tressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the land of Phlius afar: and mariners marking it swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blackening up from the sea, while all about it fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The folds of its darkling forests, named it Kerkyra the Black.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence sped they by Melitê, glad for the breeze blowing soft on their track.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Kerôsus the steep, and, far in the offing and faint as it showed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Nymphaia they fleeted, the isle where the Lady Kalypso abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughter of Atlas: and misty and doubtful appeared to their ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Crests of Thunder. And known unto Hêrê even then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the counsels of Zeus concerning these, and his mighty wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet devised she how that great voyage should prosper, and full in their path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uproused she against them the storm-winds, which caught them, and backward swept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Elektra’s rocky isle. But, from surge unto surge as they leapt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly heard they a beam with a man’s voice cry unto them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the hollow ship, the which in the midst of the stem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Athênê had set⁠—it was hewn from an oak in Dodona that grew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deadliest fear laid hold upon them as they hearkened thereto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the voice revealing the wrath of Zeus, and the stern decree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which ordained that they should not escape from the paths of an endless sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And affliction of tempests, till Circê should purge the guilt away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Absyrtus’ ruthless murder. Moreover the voice bade pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polydeukes and Kastor withal to the Gods everlasting, to grant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First through the Ausonian sea a path to the secret haunt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Circê, the daughter whom Persê unto the Sun-god bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Argo cried through the darkness: uprose that god-born pair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tyndareus’ sons, and their hands to the deathless Gods did they raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praying the prayer commanded; but hushed in awed amaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the rest of the Minyan heroes. On under canvas, and on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leapt Argo, till deep within Eridanus’ river they won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, stricken of old on the breast with the smouldering levin-fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phaëthon half-consumed from the car of his Sun-god sire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell into the gulf of the fathomless mere; and the seething stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his burning wound even yet upbelcheth clouds of steam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither across that water outspreading her pinions light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Any fowl of the air may win her way, but, even mid-flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faint-fluttering, down mid the flame it plungeth. On either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round poplars slim the Sun-god’s daughters in slow dance glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In misery wailing a piteous plaint, and adown from their eyne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raining to earth do the glittering drops of amber shine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, parched by the beams of the sun, lie strewn at their feet on the sand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whensoever the blasts of the wailing wind on the strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are dashing the dark mere’s surging billows and onward hurling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to Eridanus roll they, a huddled throng on-whirling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a rippling stream. Now a legend thereof do the Kelt-folk tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How that these which in eddies be tossed be the tears from Apollo that fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Lêto’s son, which he shed without number in ancient days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time he came to the Hyperboreans’ sacred race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his father’s threatenings driven from the sunlit heaven to the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wroth for his son, unto whom Karônis the Nymph gave birth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bright Lakyreia, where Amyrus’ outfall seaward is rolled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, such is the tale of these that amidst that people is told.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, thereon as they sailed, no care for meat nor for drink had they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither turned their thoughts unto gladness; but ever day by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorely afflicted they were till their burdened hearts grew faint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the noisome stench that uprose, the unendurable taint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Eridanus’ streams that reeked of Phaëthon burning still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever by night they hearkened the shriek of the long wail shrill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Sun-god’s daughters lamenting. Their tears, as they mourned and wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like drops from the fruit of the olive adown to the waters were swept.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thence into Rhodanus ran they, whose deep-flowing waters fleet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Eridanus’ stream: and where the great floods meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roar they turmoiling and seething. Now Rhodanus cometh from far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the ends of the earth, where the portals of Night and her mansions are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence bursteth he forth, and divideth his stream; for the one part roareth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the beaches of Ocean, and one to the sea Ionian poureth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a third to the main Sardinian, the sea-gulf limitless-vast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through seven mouths sendeth his flood. So from Rhodanus forth they passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they drave over wintry meres wide-spread⁠—none telleth their bound⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the Keltic mainland, and well-nigh there had they found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inglorious doom: for a certain branch turns sidewards flowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Ocean-gulf; thereinto were these, of the peril unknowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At point to thrust, and never alive had they won thereout.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But forth out of heaven Hêrê darted, and pealed her shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the rock Herkynian: with fear were they shaken because of her cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one man all, for terribly crashed the wide-arched sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backward they turned at the Goddess’s warning, and then were they ware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the track, whereby for their home-return they needs must fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So at last came they to a beach where the sea-surge moaning rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Hêrê’s devising, through tribes of the Keltic folk untold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ligurians passing unharmed; for about them a mist-veil dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Day after day, as homeward they fared, did the Goddess spread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so through the midmost mouth of the river Argo sailed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And safe on the “Long Row Isles’ did they land; for the prayers had prevailed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sons of Zeus; for the which cause altars and temples aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto these have been reared: nor with those seafarers alone went they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As helpers, but Zeus made these all mariners’ saviours to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the “Long Row” left they, and on to Aithalia sped oversea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There in athlete-strife did they supple their limbs, till the sweat of them dripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As rain, and the pebbles are flecked as with scarf-skin strigil-stripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this day; and their quoits and their wondrous armour are there, all stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet in the name of the haven the glory of Argo is shown.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And swiftly speeding thence they fleeted the sea-swell o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Ausonia’s strand Tyrrhenian lifting their eyes evermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they came to Aiaia’s haven renowned, and forth of the prow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hawsers adown to the strand they cast. And Circê now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There did they find, in the spray of the surf as she bathed her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that dreams of the night had made the Spell-queen sorely adread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with blood did it seem that her palace-chambers, and every wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were running, and flame was devouring her magic herbs, even all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith she was wont to bewitch what strangers soever came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And herself with the blood of murder quenched that red-glowing flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scooping it up with her hands: so ceased she from deadly dismay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore, when dawning uprose, in the sea-surf’s flashing spray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At her waking she washed her vesture and bathed her braided hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beasts⁠—not like unto ravening beasts of the wold these were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in likeness fashioned as men, but as though from a medley-heap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They had gotten their limbs⁠—in a throng followed after her, even as sheep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the folds in their multitudes following after the shepherd go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such shapes from the slime primeval did earth first cause to grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herself the creator, compacted of limbs in confusion blent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere yet into hardness she grew ’neath a rainless firmament,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither yet from the shafts of a scorching sun had she gotten her dews</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of refreshing: but these as the ranks of an army did Time confuse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he marshalled them forth into being:⁠—such monsters after her pressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And exceeding amazement fell on the heroes; and each man guessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he gazed upon Circê’s form, and the eyes unsoftened with ruth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That this should be none save Aiêtes’ sister in very sooth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when she had bidden her terrors of dreams of the night to flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back straightway she paced; and the heroes she bade in her subtlety</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To follow, with witching beck of her fingers charming them on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet steadfastly tarried the throng at the hest of Aison’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their place: but he went, and beside him the Kolchian maiden he drew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So trod they the selfsame path till they entered in, those two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Circê’s hall. In amaze at their coming, the Sorcery-queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade them to sit them down upon thrones of burnished sheen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But soundless and wordless they sped to her hearthstone’s hallowed place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there sat, after the wont of the suppliant in evil case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Medea bowed her adown, and in both hands hid her face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Jason set in the earth his mighty-hilted sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewithal he had slain Aiêtes’ son; and his eyes guilt-lowered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rose never to meet her glance. And straightway Circê was ware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the vengeance-hounded feet, and the hands that the bloodstain bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore for awe of the statutes of Zeus the Suppliant-ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Manslayer’s Champion, yea, an exceeding jealous lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She offered the sacrifice whereby they are cleansed from their guilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they come to his mercy-seat, by whose fierce hands blood hath been spilt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First, to atone for the murder inexpiate yet, she held</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth over their heads the young of a swine whose dugs yet swelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fruit of the womb; thereafter she severed its throat, and she dyed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their hands with the blood, and again with other drink-offerings beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made the atonement, calling on Zeus, the Cleanser of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Avenger of suppliants murder-stained, on his name which call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then all that in cleansing she used from the mansion her handmaids bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Naiad-nymphs, which ministered whatso she needed therefor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Circê abode by the hearth, and thereon without wine did she burn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praying the while, the atonement-cakes, to the end she might turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their anger the terrible Vengeance-fiends, and that Zeus might be wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto mercy and grace to the suppliants twain, his pardon who sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether they bowed at his throne for the life of a stranger shed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or their kindred hands with the blood of their nearest and dearest were red.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when she had wrought all so, and the work of atonement was done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then raised she them up, and seated them each on a gleaming throne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And herself sat nigh them, and eye to eye she straitly inquired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore they voyaged thus, and the thing that their hearts desired,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from what far shore they had come to her land and her palace-home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in suppliance sat on her threshold; for into her soul had there come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she pondered, a hideous thought, as her dreams in remembrance returned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to hear the voice of the maiden her kinswoman sorely she yearned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she knew her, so soon as she lifted her down-drooped eyes from the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that plain to discern were all which drew from the Sun their birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as they lightened afar a splendour like as of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the flashings of their eyes upon whoso their face should behold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Medea told unto her all things that she craved to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaking the Kolchian tongue with utterance gentle and low⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-hearted Aiêtes’ child⁠—of the Quest, of the paths where fared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heroes, of all the conflicts sharp and stern that they dared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How herself into sin by her woeful sister’s pleading was led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how from her father’s tyrannous terrors afar she had fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Phrixus’ sons. But from this she shrank, that nothing she said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Absyrtus’ murder; yet Circê discerned it: but pity-stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By her woe-stricken kinswoman’s tears, she answered and spake the word:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah wretch! thou hast found thee an evil and shameful homeward path!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not long, I ween, shalt thou ’scape from Aiêtes’ terrible wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, but full soon will he go to the dwellings of Hellas-land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To avenge the blood of his son, the unspeakable deed of thine hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, forasmuch as my suppliant thou art, and my sister withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None other harm unto thee at thy coming of me shall befall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But begone from mine halls, companion who art in an alien’s flight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whosoe’er be this fellow unknown thou hast ta’en in thy father’s despite!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, knee me no knees, earth-croucher! Naught shalt thou win save blame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save a curse for thine heart’s devices, for this thy flight of shame!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she; and comfortless grief overwhelmed Medea: she cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her robe o’er her eyes, and she wailed and wailed, till the hero at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the hand upraised her, and forth of the palace-doors he led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she quivered with terror: and so from the mansions of Circê they fled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet they passed not unmarked of the Bride of Zeus; but Iris bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tidings to her, when she spied them faring forlorn from her door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Hêrê had bidden her watch what time they should wend to the ship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So again on her message she sped her, and spake with eager lip:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear Iris, if ever mine hest thou fulfilledst in days overpast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now hie thee away, upon hurrying pinions speeding fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hitherward bid thou Thetis to come to me, up from the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rising: for need of her cometh to me. Thence hasten thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the echoing beaches whereon the brazen rows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Fire-god’s anvils are smitten with thunderous-crashing blows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak to him to still the fire-blast’s breathings, till Argo thereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall have sped: thereafter shalt thou with my message to Aiolus fly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiolus, king of the welkin-begotten winds of the sky:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou tell him my purpose, that all blasts under the firmament</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may hush to rest, and let not a wandering gust be sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ruffle the face of the sea: let Zephyr alone blow on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until to Alkinoüs’ isle Phaeacian the heroes have won.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she: forthright from the verge of Olympus did Iris leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleaving the welkin, outspreading her light wings. Into the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aegean she plunged, even there where the mansions of Nereus stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first unto Thetis she came, and according to all the command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hêrê she spake, and uproused her to Heaven’s Queen to soar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next unto Hephaistus she came, and with speed at her word he forbore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the clanging of hammers of iron; and stayed from their tempest-blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the smoke-grimed bellows. Thereafter on to the third hath she passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiolus, Hippotas’ glorious son. And even the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her message she told, and her swift knees rested from journeying toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thetis from Nereus had gone and her sisters, and up from the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Olympus-ward to the presence of Hêrê the Queen passed she.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she caused her to sit by her side, and she uttered forth the word:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear, Goddess Thetis, the thing that my spirit to tell thee is stirred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou knowest how honoured is Aison’s son of me in mine heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they that with him in the toil of the Quest have borne their part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone did I save them then through the Clashing Rocks when they flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When lightened the terrible flames, when the storm of the fire-blast blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When white were the ragged reefs with the spume of the boiling surge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a path by Scylla the Rock and Charybdis’ fathomless gorge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreadly outbelching, awaits them:⁠—O Thetis, I nursed thee of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even I, when thou wast but a wordless babe, and I loved thee more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the others thy fellows, the Maids in the halls of brine which abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because thou refusedst, for all his desire, to couch by the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Zeus⁠—ay, so evermore be his thoughts all lust for embrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a Goddess immortal, or couch of a princess of mortal race!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for reverence of me, and for sacred fear which the heart of thee bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst thou shrink from his love: thereafter a mighty oath he sware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never shouldst thou be called the bride of a God undying;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet for all this spared not, but followed thee sore loth, lustfully eyeing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till reverend Themis revealed unto him all Fate’s decree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How that thy weird was to bear a son who should mightier be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than his father: wherefore, for all his desire, he refrained, for dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest another should rise up matching his might, and should rule in his stead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the Deathless, and so should himself not hold the dominion for aye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the best of the sons of earth for thine husband I found, in the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That saw thine espousals, that sweetness of marriage might comfort thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And babes: and the Gods to the feast of thy solemnity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even all, did I bid: in mine own hands then did the splendour shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the bridal torch, to requite that love, that honour of thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go to now, a word will I tell thee, a prophecy faithful and fast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time thy son to the plain Elysian shall come at the last⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy son, who now in the dwellings of Cheiron the Centaur-king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forlorn of the mother’s breast, is nursed by the Maids of the Spring⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is it his weird to wed Aiêtes’ daughter; but thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Medea’s mother that shalt be, help thy daughter now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, Peleus withal⁠—ha! why is thine anger quenchless-hot?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Folly was his; yet even the Gods may be folly-distraught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a surety, I ween, by my behests shall Hephaistus cease</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cause the might of his fire to burn; and Hippotades,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiolus, all the rushing wings of his winds shall refrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save only the steadfast-breathing West, till the heroes shall gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The havens Phaeacian. Devise for them thou a return without bane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the crags and the tyrannous-buffeting surges make me afraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These only; and these shall be foiled, if thou and thy sisters aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ’wildered amazement suffer them not to thrust their keel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charybdis-ward, lest down through her jaws to destruction they reel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither suffer thou them to approach unto Scylla’s hideous lair⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ausonian Scylla the deadly, whom nightmare Hekatê bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even she whom Krataiïs they call, to the Ancient of the sea⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest with her horrible jaws down-swooping suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She destroy of the heroes the chiefest. But guide thou onward the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the course where still is a hairbreadth escape from destruction’s grip.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and Thetis to her made answer with suchlike word:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If the might of the ravening fire and the winds’ breath fury-stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall in very deed be refrained, would I of a surety essay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, I would pledge me, what though the surges should bar their way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring their ship safe through, if the West blow fresh and strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now is it time that I fare on the far track measureless-long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto my sisters⁠—they which herein shall strengthen mine hand⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to where the ship’s stern-hawsers be cast forth on to the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the men may at dawn take thought for the home-return to their land.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and departed, and plunged from the height of the heaven mid swirls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the dark-blue sea; and she called to her sisters, the Nereïd-girls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To come to her help: and the Maids of the Sea, so soon as they heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered; and Thetis told them according to Hêrê’s word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she sped them all to the sea Ausonian thence forthright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swifter herself than the flash of an eye, or the arrows of light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sun, from the uttermost bourne when his chariot-wheels upflame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On through the water she fleeted and flashed, until she came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the beach Aiaian of that Tyrrhenian main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she found by the galley the heroes: the shaft on the string did they strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their sport, and the javelin they hurled: but she stole unto Peleus’ side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she touched his hand; for of old had he won her, his Goddess-bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the eyes of the others were holden: to him did the Goddess appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his eyes only discerned; and she murmured low in his ear:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No longer now on the beaches Tyrrhenian sitting abide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But cast ye the hawsers of Argo loose with the dawning-tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obeying your helper Hêrê’s command; for at her behest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sea-maids, daughters of Nereus, all to the trysting have pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the midst of the Rocks which the Wanderers hight your galley to speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe; for thereby is your course, and the path by fate decreed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But see that thou show me to none, when thine eyes my form discern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the Nymphs, as we meet thee, lest hotter thou cause mine anger to burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than when erst thou didst kindle my spirit to anger swift and stern.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and she plunged through abysses of sea, and he saw her no more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sharp pain smote him, who had not beheld her theretofore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the day she forsook her bridal bower and her couch at the first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When for noble Achilles their babe into sudden anger she burst.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the mortal flesh of her child did the Goddess encompass aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the midst of the night with flames of fire, and day by day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ambrosia anointed his tender frame, to make him thereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Immortal, that loathly eld might come not his body anigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Peleus from slumber upstarted, and saw his beloved son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gasping mid flame; and he sent abroad, as he looked thereon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A terrible cry in his folly exceeding. She heard him, and whirled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The babe aloft, and screaming adown on the earth she hurled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And herself like a breath of the wind, or a dream at the breaking of sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth of the hall flitted swiftly, and into the sea did she leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her anger: and never thereafter returned she thither again.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Amazement fettered his soul: but, for all his ’wildered pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his comrades he spake forth all the commands of his Goddess-wife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So these in the midst brake off, and refrained from the athlete-strife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the meat of the eventide and the earth-strawn beds they dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon, having supped, as aforetime they laid them and slept through the night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Dawn ’gan sprinkle the sky from her chalice of light overbrimming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then, when the wings of the West-wind the face of the waters were skimming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went up from the strand, and they sat on the thwarts, and aboard they drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blithely the anchor-stones from the deep, and in order due</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest of the tackling all they lashed, and the sail spread wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On high from the yard-arm, straining it taut with the sheets of hide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Onward the fresh breeze wafted the ship: full soon they beheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fair isle flower-bestarred, where the Siren Destroyers dwelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Acheloüs’ clear-voiced daughters, whose sweet songs wont to beguile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their witchery whosoe’er cast anchor anigh that isle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were children whom lovely Terpsichorê, one of the Muses, bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the flood Acheloüs: and unto Dêmêter’s daughter of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she yet was unwedded, the noble Persephonê, ministered they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in blended chorus they sang: but as birds in the latter day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were they fashioned in part to behold, and as maidens in part they were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aye keeping watch from the harbour-cliffs overbeetling their lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From many an one had they reft sweet home-return, whom they slew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wasting consuming them. Lo, on a sudden to Argo’s crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pealed from their lips their clear-sweet voice. From the galley now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were they even at point to cast the hawser ashore from the prow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Thracian Orpheus matched him against that demon choir,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hands of Oiagrius’ scion swept the Bistonian lyre;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the march of the song o’er the rippling melody rang ever higher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till their ears were filled with the chiming and thrilled with the triumph of sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Sea-maids’ shrilling chant in the storm of the lyre was drowned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On flitted the ship, by the West-wind borne and the sighing swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upleaping astern; and bootless the weird song failed and fell:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not bootless all, for that Teleon’s goodly son did leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the polished thwart, ere his comrades could stay him, into the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Butes, whose soul was bewitched by the Sirens’ clear-ringing breath;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he swam through the purple surge to tread that strand of death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doomed wretch!⁠—full soon had they robbed him there of his home-return;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for him did the Cyprian Lady of Eryx in pity yearn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she snatched him away from the swirling wave, and safe she bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her grace to dwell on the height Lilybœan on Sicily’s shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in anguish of spirit they left him: but perils worse than these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awaited them⁠—shipwrecking gulfs in the meeting-place of the seas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For on this side Scylla’s smooth sheer crag up-towering loomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on that side Charybdis seething in ceaseless thunder boomed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And otherwhere, swung by the mighty surge, met clanging and crashing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Wandering Rocks, where afront were the spurts of fire out-flashing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the crests of the cliffs, o’er the crag red-glowing on high that burned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with smoke was the air all mistily shrouded: thou hadst not discerned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beams of the sun. Then, albeit Hephaistus refrained from his toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the hot uprushing steam did the sea yet bubble and boil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Nereus’ daughters from this side and that side the heroes met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Thetis the Goddess her hand to the blade of the rudder set;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And onward amidst of the Wandering Rocks the ship haled they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when o’er the face of a summer sea the dolphins play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circling around a ship as she runneth before the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One while in front of her stern beheld, one while behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And alongside anon: and the shipmen be blithe for their gambolling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So darted they up from the depths, so circled, a glimmering ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round Argo the ship; and Thetis was steering her course through all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when now was the galley at point on the Wandering Rocks to fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway they kilted their skirts above their snowy knees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And high on the crests of the skerries, the breaking of madding seas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this side and that side they sped, far ranged apart to stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sea-cataracts crashed on her beam, fierce surges on either hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Higher upsoaring and higher o’er the rocks were bursting and streaming;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these now towered to the welkin, as mountain-crags in seeming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now, whelmed down the abyss, on the Ocean’s nethermost floor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grounded they: over their crests did the triumphing rollers roar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Nereïds, as maidens that flit to and fro on a sandy beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With parted gown-laps kilted about the waist of each,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sport with a shapely rounded ball: one tosseth it on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her fellow receiveth; and high ’twixt heaven and earth is it gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sped from her hand to the welkin; and never it toucheth the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So from one unto other’s hand passed on did the galley bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the air o’er the crests of the waves as they sped her, clear alway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the rocks; and around her the water upbelching was seething aye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Fire-king’s self on the ridge of a surf-lashed scaur was there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his sturdy hammer the weight of his massy shoulder bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence marvelling gazed Hephaistus: the bride of Zeus looked down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where she stood in the sunlit heaven, and round Athênê had thrown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her arms, in such faintness of fear, as she looked thereon, did she cling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And long as the space of a day is lengthened out in the spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So long was the time that they laboured, heaving with might and main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship through the thunderous-echoing rocks, till the wind again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blew out the canvas; and onward they ran, and swiftly they sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the meads of Thrinakria’s isle, where the kine of the Sun-god fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the Nymphs in the semblance of sea-mews down through abysses of brine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunged, when wrought was the hest of Zeus’s Bride divine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then through the air did there come to the heroes a bleating of sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a lowing of kine full nigh to their ears floated over the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There a shepherdess-goddess pastured the sheep o’er the dewy lea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phaëthusa⁠—youngest of all the Sun-god’s daughters was she⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing a shepherd’s crook of silver the while in her hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lampetiê herded the kine, and of mountain-brass was the wand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she swayed as she followed their steps: and the heroes themselves espied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those herds by the river that pastured, the sliding gleam beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the plain and the water-meadow: was none amid all that herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dun-hued of hide, but all white even as milk appeared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a glory of golden horns on the stately heads of them shone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they passed in the daytime the Sun-god’s herds, and as night drew on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They went cleaving the great sea-gulf rejoicing, until once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Child of the Mist, the Dawning, flashed on their sea-path hoar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now fronting the mouth of the gulf Ionian lieth an isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sea Keraunian, forest-mantled, with deep rich soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereunder the sickle, saith legend, is lying⁠—vouchsafe me your grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Song-goddesses: loth do I speak of the tale of the olden days⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewithal the strength of his father by Kronos was ruthlessly shorn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(But of some is it called Demêter-of-Hades’ Reaper of Corn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Demêter in that land wont to abide in the days of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she taught the Titans to reap the cornfield’s spears of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her love unto Makris): the Sickle-land is it named therefrom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Phaeacians’ hallowed nurse: and by lineage so these come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ouranus’ very blood, and his sons the Phaeacians be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Argo through much tribulation came from Thrinakria’s sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the breeze to the land Phaeacian. With welcoming sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alkinoüs the king and his people received them in kindly wise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the city with riot of mirth o’er the far-driven ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rejoiced: thou hadst said that they joyed o’er their own re-given sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the heroes themselves through the throng in gladness triumphant strode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as though the heart of Haimonia-land they trod.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But now were they like to be donning their mail for the onset-cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So mighty a host of Kolchian men appeared hard by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which down through the gorge of the Pontus, and on through the Crags Dark-blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had passed to the uttermost sea in quest of the hero-crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Medea they chiefly were eager to hale to her father’s house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without parley, or threatened else that the war-yell dolorous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should be raised for the slaughter-vengeance unrelenting and stern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both then, and when led by Aiêtes their host should thereafter return.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet Alkinoüs the king restrained them amidst of their lust for the fray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he greatly desired without the clash of the strife to allay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The haughty-hearted feud betwixt the war-hosts twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the maiden in deadly fear besought again and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The comrades of Aison’s son; and again and again did she cling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her hands round the knees of Arêtê, the wife of Alkinoüs the king:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I kneel unto thee, O Queen!⁠—be gracious, and yield me not now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Kolchians to hale to my father, if thou art of humankind, thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which livest by bread⁠—of the hearts into folly that swiftliest rush,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom lightest transgression adown the abysses of ruin doth push,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so as my wisdom forsook me⁠—nay, but it was not done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By reason of lust: be witness the sacred light of the sun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be witness the rites of Perseus’ daughter, which haunteth the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That not of my will with men of an alien land in flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did I haste from mine home; but horrible dread on my spirit wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bethink me of fleeing thus when I sinned: other help there was not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither hope. My maidenhead yet unmarred abideth and clean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it was in the halls of my father. Have pity upon me, O Queen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And incline unto mercy the heart of thy lord! May the Deathless so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A life all-perfect on thee, all happiness bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sons, and the boast of a city unravaged of any foe!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So bowed at Arêtê’s knees did she weep, and so beseech;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to the heroes appealed she, turning to each after each:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For your sakes, O ye chiefest of might, and for your emprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am I hounded of terrors thus, even I, by whose device</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye bowed the bulls to the yoke, and reaped that deadly swath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Earth-born Men⁠—even I, through whom on the homeward path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye shall bear the Fleece of Gold full soon to Haimonia’s shore⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even I, who have lost my country, my parents have lost evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have lost mine home, have lost all pleasures of life that I knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to you have restored your country, your homes have restored unto you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with rapture-litten eyes your parents again shall ye see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from me⁠—a tyrannous god all happiness reft from me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with alien men do I wander forlorn, an accursèd wight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dread ye the covenant-troth and the oaths: the Avenging Sprite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the suppliants dread, and the Gods’ retribution, if ever I come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Aiêtes’ hands, amid outrage and agony meeting my doom!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No temple have I, neither tower of salvation, nor refuge beside:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You cast I before me, mine only shield in the perilous tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard hearts unrelenting and ruthless!⁠—ye know not reverence, ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the suppliant, though ye behold as I stretch despairingly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine hands to the knees of a stranger queen. Yet the Kolchian array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One and all, had ye faced, when ye thirsted to bear the Fleece away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, Aiêtes the proud had ye faced:⁠—but your manhood hath fainted, is flown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, when your foes from their helpers be sundered, a handful alone.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So passioned and prayed Medea. To whomso she bowed in prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever he heartened her, fain to assuage her anguished despair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their keen-whetted lances in wrathful-quivering hands did they shake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unscabbarded swords; and they swore they would fail not her help nor forsake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the strange king touching the maiden unrighteous judgment spake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo, mid the throng as they wrangled, the night, that putteth to sleep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The labours of men, stole o’er them, and all the earth did she steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the balm of her quiet: but not on the maid fell slumber’s peace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One whit, but her heart in her bosom for anguish writhed without cease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as when a toiling woman windeth her thread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the night, and her fatherless children around her be moaning for bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that widowed she is; and adown her cheeks stream ever the tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she thinketh upon this dreary lot that hath darkened her years;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so were the maid’s cheeks wet, and her heart evermore in her breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the anguish-thorn impaled was writhing in wild unrest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But amidst of the city the palace within, as in days gone by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alkinoüs the king, and the lady of queenliest majesty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wife of Alkinoüs, lay in their bed, and many a word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the darkness in counsel they spake of the maiden; and thus to her lord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With loving and earnest speech made answer the queen, and she said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yea, O my beloved⁠—yet save, I beseech thee, the woe-stricken maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Kolchians, showing a grace to the Minyan men. For anigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To our isle lieth Argos; the men of Haimonia dwell hard by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Aiêtes⁠—he dwelleth not even anear, and nought do we know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aiêtes: we hear but his name. But the maiden’s awful woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she made supplication, mine heart within my breast hath torn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yield her not up to the Kolchians, my king, to her sire to be borne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In madness she sinned at the first, when she gave him the charm that should tame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bulls; and with wrong to amend that wrong⁠—ay, ofttimes the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our sinning we do!⁠—she straightway essayed; and, shrinking in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her proud sire’s tyrannous wrath, she fled. Now the man, as I hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Jason, is bound by mighty oaths, which his own lips said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he pledged him to make her, his halls within, his wife true-wed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore, beloved, constrain not Aison’s son to forswear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His oath, of thy will, nor consent that the sire from the daughter should tear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her life in the rage of his soul amid pangs unendurably keen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For cruelly jealous against their daughters are fathers, I ween.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What vengeance did Nykteus wreak on Antiopê lovely-faced!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What woes were of Danaê borne on the wide sea’s desolate waste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through her sire’s mad rage! And of late, nor afar, it came to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wanton-tyrannous Echetus thrust the goads of brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the eyes of his daughter: and wasted and worn by her woeful doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is grinding the grain of brass in a hovel’s dungeon-gloom.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she beseeching; and softened so was the heart of the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the words of his wife, and he spake in such wise answering:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Arêtê, the Kolchian men would I even, in harness arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive forth of the land, for a grace to the heroes, to save yon maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I fear to set the unswerving justice of Zeus at nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor were this well done, to contemn, according to this thy thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiêtes:⁠—of kinglier king than Aiêtes may no man tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, war, if he list, shall he bring against Hellas, afar though he dwell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore ’tis meet and right that the sentence be spoken of me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in all men’s eyes shall be best, and I will not hide it from thee:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the damsel be virgin yet, I decree that the daughter be led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the father: but if she minister unto a husband’s bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will part not from husband wife; nor, if haply she bear ’neath her zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His offspring, to foes will I yield up a child of Aison’s son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and round him straight did the veil of slumber close.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she laid up his wisdom her heart within; and she straightway uprose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her couch in the palace: the women her handmaids with hurrying feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came, eagerly tending their lady the Queen with service meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she silently summoned her herald, and spake in his ears her request</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be instant in bidding Aison’s son, at his Queen’s behest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wed with the maiden, nor more with Alkinoüs the king to plead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For himself to the Kolchians would go and pronounce the doom decreed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, if she were virgin yet, he would render her up to be led</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her father: but if she ministered unto a husband’s bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not then would he sever the wife from the love of the lawfully wed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and forth of the hall the feet of the herald sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Jason, Arêtê the Queen’s fair-omened message to bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Alkinoüs’ counsel, the word of the god-revering king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the heroes he found by the ship in their war-gear abiding awake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the haven of Hyllus, anigh to the city; and out he spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Queen’s whole message, and each man’s spirit was gladness-stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as he spake in their ears an exceeding welcome word.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Straightway they mingled the bowl to the Gods that abide for aye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with reverent hands to the altar the victim-sheep drew they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the selfsame night for the maiden prepared they the couch of the bride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a hallowed cave, where of old time Makris wont to abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The child of the Honey-lord, Aristaius, whose wisdom discerned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The toils of the bees, and the wealth of the labour of olives learned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she was the first that received and in sheltering bosom bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The child Nysaian of Zeus, on Eubœa’s Abantian shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with honey she moistened his lips, where the dew of life was dried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Hermes bare him out of the fire. But Hêrê espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from all the isle that Nymph in her fierceness of anger she drave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore she dwelt far thence in the holy Phaeacian cave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blessing and weal beyond word to the folk of the land she gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even there did they spread them the mighty couch and thereover they laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glittering Golden Fleece, that the marriage so might be made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honoured, a song in the mouths of bards. Flowers manifold-fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Nymphs in their snowy bosoms gathered, and thitherward bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a splendour like as of fire glowed round those shapes divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such glory-gleams from the golden tufts did shimmer and shine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet longing lit up their eyes: howbeit did awe withhold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one, though she yearned to lay but her hand on the wonder of gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of that bright throng the river Aigaius’ daughters were some,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some on the crests of Melitê dwelt in their mountain-home;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forest-glen Nymphs of the plains were some: for Zeus’s bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Hêrê, had sent them for honour to Jason’s marriage-tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cave is to this day named Medea’s Sacred Grot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as to wedlock’s solemnities there these twain they brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the odorous-sweet fine linen they spread. And the heroes without</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guarded them war-spear in hand, lest haply for battle the rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their foes unawares should set on them, or ever the rites were sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with sprays of bounteous leaf did they wreathe each man his head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in harmony all, while clear the harp of Orpheus rang,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the entering-in of the cave the bridal hymn they sang.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not in Alkinoüs’ home the hero Aison’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in halls of his father, the goal of marriage full fain had won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When home he returned to Iolkos, and so withal was the mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Medea, but hard compulsion constrained them now to be joined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But even as never the tribes of the woe-stricken children of earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May tread full-footed the path of delight, but still with our mirth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hand in hand goeth pacing affliction bitter as gall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So these, when melted with rapture of love were their souls, were thrall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto dread, what things of Alkinoüs’ sentence should haply befall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So soon as the dawn with her beams ambrosial climbed heaven’s height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scattered the gloomy night through the welkin, and laughed in her light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The island-beaches, and all the paths through the plains that wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dew-gleaming afar, and awoke in the streets a murmur of sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her folk were astir through the town, and astir was the Kolchian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their camp far off on the bounds of the Makrian sea-ringed coast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then straightway Alkinoüs hied him, by covenant-plight to hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To utter his purpose as touching the maiden. His sceptre of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His staff of justice, he bare, wherewith to the multitude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the city were meted the statutes with righteousness endued.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beside him, in ordered ranks arrayed in their harness of fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Squadron by squadron were marching Phaeacia’s chiefest of might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth from the tower-girt city in throngs the women broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gaze on the heroes; and men therewithal of the country-folk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met them, which heard the tidings; for Hêrê afar had sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rumour that erred not: and one a lamb unblemished led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The choice of the sheep: with a heifer unlaboured one drew nigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And others were ranging the earthen jars of wine hard by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mingle. The sacrifice-smoke was wafted far away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came women with webs of costly labour, as women may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with trinkets of gold, and with manifold ornaments therebeside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such gifts as be wont to be brought to the newly-wedded bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they marvelled beholding the heroes’ stature and comeliness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they towered o’er the throng, and Oiagrius’ scion amidst of the press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in time to the harmony-ringing lyre and the chanted strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever he smote and anon with his glittering sandal the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Nymphs all blending their voices, when marriage-notes chimed on the string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifted the lovely bridal chant, and anon would they sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone and unprompted the song, as the wreaths of their dances they twined.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Hêrê, of thee was it done; for thou puttedst it into the mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Arêtê to tell Alkinoüs’ prudent word of the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But so soon as the king had pronounced the decree of unswerving right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when now was the marriage accomplished proclaimed in all men’s ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then took he heed that it so should abide: no deadly fears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched him, nor Aiêtes’ terrible wrath might his purpose shake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he held by the word he had plighted, the oath that he would not break.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when now were the Kolchians ware that in vain they besought him to swerve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when now he commanded them⁠—“Either obey my decree and observe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or forth of my havens and land afar shall your galleys sail”;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then in that hour for their own king’s threatenings ’gan they quail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And besought him amongst his folk to receive them. So there in the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long time with the people Phaeacian dwelt the Kolchian band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the Bacchiad lords, which by lineage sprang from Ephyrê,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the years passed, settled amidst them, and they to the isle oversea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sailed: thence to the Thunder-hills of Abantian men must they go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefrom to the folk Nestaian, and on to Oricum so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the river of time ere then down many a year must flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But still to the altars the yearly sacrifice men bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Fates and the Nymphs in the fane of Apollo the Shepherd-king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which altars Medea builded. And gifts, ere they passed o’er the wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many Alkinoüs gave them, and many Arêtê gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter withal on Medea Phaeacian handmaid-thralls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve did the Queen bestow, to follow her forth of her halls.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the seventh day sailed they away from Drepanê. Came with the morn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fresh breeze sent of Zeus: and so by the wind’s breath borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward and onward they ran. Howbeit not yet on the strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Achaia by doom of the God might they tread, that hero-band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till yet they had toiled in the uttermost parts of Libya-land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now by the bay that is named the Ambracian Gulf had they sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now had they left the Aetolian land with sail wide spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereafter the isles in the narrow Echinad strait that lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pelops’ land in the offing but now might they dimly descry:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then were they snatched away by the North-wind’s baleful blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mid course: on to the Libyan sea did it sweep them fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine nights together, and days as many, until they had run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the Syrtis afar, wherefrom returning is none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ships, when a storm-driven galley within that gulf shall be found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For on every hand be shoals, and the tangled weed all round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the deep, and the salt foam-scum over all doth mantle and cling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into haziest distance stretcheth the land: no living thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There moveth that creepeth or flieth. On that drear coast by the sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the flood-tide⁠—for ofttimes the outrushing ebb draweth back to the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off from the land, and again with gurgling rush and roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cometh bursting over his beaches⁠—afar on the innermost shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were they suddenly thrust, that the keel’s full depth was covered no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then leapt they forth of the ship, and in trouble of soul did they gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dimness, the long low backs of the land all formless haze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far stretching away unbroken. Nor stream nor spring they espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither path, nor, how distant soe’er, a steading thereon they descried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of herdmen, but all the landskip in dead calm folded lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in sore vexation of spirit did hero to hero say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What manner of land is this? Whither now hath the tempest’s sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurled us? Would God we had dared, all reckless of deadly dismay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rush right on through the path of the rocks of the grim sea-gate!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Verily better it were, had we overleapt the fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Zeus, in daring a deed of heroic mood to have died!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, what thing should we do, which be prisoned by winds to abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, though but a little span we continue?⁠—in such drear wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plain of the limitless land stretcheth up to the lowering skies.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So cried they: thereafter in utter despair for their evil case</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ankaius the helmsman spake with anguish-darkened face:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yea verily, ghastliest doom hath undone us. Escape there is not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From destruction: for us but remaineth to suffer the cruellest lot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which have fallen on this desolation; yea, even though a breath there should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of air from the land, forasmuch as nought save shoals do I see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar as I gaze o’er the waters around; and scantly the brine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overscaleth the hoary sands in foam-fretted line upon line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and our god-built ship had to shards been wretchedly torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long since far off from the shore, but that out of the sea was it borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the flood-tide’s self uplifted, and high on the land was it thrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the tide now raceth aback to the deep, and foam alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereon saileth no keel, rolleth on, and but thinly the earth hath it veiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore, I trow, all hope of our sailing hath utterly failed⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All hope of return! Let another man show sea-craft herein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, there is the helm⁠—whosoever is fain our deliverance to win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him sit in my seat. But little doth Zeus desire, I wot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To crown with a day of return the toils we have suffered and wrought.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, weeping the while; and the others agreed thereto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even all which had knowledge of ships; and all the hearts of them grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chilly and numb, and over their cheeks was paleness shed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as, like unto lifeless spectres of folk long dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men creep through the streets of a town, and despairing the issue await</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of famine or leaguer of war, or a tempest unspeakably great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which hath swept o’er the land, and hath flooded the labours of oxen untold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when great gouts of blood from the images sweating have rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or when from the shrines of the temple ghostly bellowings wail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the sun o’er the day’s mid noontide draweth the night’s black veil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of heaven, and the glittering stars come forth in splendour pale;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So stricken, the chieftains then by the strand’s verge endless-wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roamed loitering on. And at one stride came dark eventide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And piteously around each other their arms did they throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With weeping farewell, that each from his fellow apart might go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To die, and might fling him adown on the sand to wait for the end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So this way and that way to choose their couch of the night did they wend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each in the folds of his mantle enshrouded his head, and they lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fasting and thirsting there through the livelong night and the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awaiting a piteous death. And the handmaids huddled in fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round Aiêtes’ daughter apart shrilled lamentation drear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when, of their mother forsaken, fledglings shrilly cheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which have fallen to earth from a cleft in a sheer scaur’s precipice-steep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as when ’twixt the low-browed banks of Pactolus’ fair-flowing stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swans are upraising their song, and the meadow of dewy gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmureth round, and murmur the river’s ripples fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the handmaidens bowing low in the dust their golden hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All through the night were uplifting their pitiful wail of despair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now out of life had they slidden, had vanished from human ken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the name and the fame of them never more had been heard among men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those noblest of heroes!⁠—their task unaccomplished had ended then:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit the Heroine-nymphs had pity of them as they pined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In helpless despair, the Warders of Libya, they that did find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Athênê, what time from the head of her father, in battle-gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All flashing, she sprang, and the new-born bathed they in Trito’s mere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noon of the day it was, and the sun upon Libya-land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burned with his fiercest beams: by Aison’s son did they stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mantle-shroud from his head with soft light touch drew they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the hero, downward drooping his eyes, thence turned them away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For awe of the shapes divine: but with gentle words of cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With open face did they speak unto him in his ’wildered fear:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ill-starred one, wherefore so grievously smitten art thou with despair?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We know how ye fared for the Golden Fleece: of your toils we be ware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even all the strength-overmastering labours on land that ye proved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all ye endured on the face of the watery deep as ye roved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Solitary Ones of the land, the Heroines, are we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warders and daughters of Libya, which speak which our voices to thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up then: let thy spirit not thus to affliction of misery yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And uprouse thy comrades, so soon as the steeds of the car swift-wheeled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Poseidon, by Amphitritê loosed from the yoke, run free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto your mother the nursing-debt then render ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all her travail, when long she bare you her womb within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So haply again unto hallowed Achaia-land shall ye win.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake they, and vanished, there as they stood, in the selfsame place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where murmured their voices close in his ear: and with startled gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staring around, on the earth sat Jason, and cried in amaze:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be gracious, ye glorious Goddesses, lone in the desert which dwell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet what this word of our homecoming meaneth I wot not well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will gather my comrades, and tell them, and learn what token is this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of escape:⁠—in the multitude of counsellors safety there is.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then he leapt to his feet, and he shouted afar o’er the desolate shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All dust-begrimed, as a lion that seeking his mate doth roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up and down through the forest-gloom: deep glens through many a hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off at the sound of his voice’s thunder shuddering thrill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tremble the oxen that roam the meads with exceeding fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the herders of kine: but never a whit dismaying to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was the hero’s cry to his friends when the voice of his shouting they heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they gathered with down-drooped eyes to his side, and they sat at his word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sore troubled anigh where lay the ship; and the women withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the heroes mingled sat; and he spake, and he told them all:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hearken, O friends, for in this mine affliction Goddesses three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vesture of goatskins girded about, from neck unto knee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overdrooping their shoulders and waists, as maidens of earth to behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood over mine head full nigh, and they drew my mantle’s fold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away from mine head with fingers light, and they bade me arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my couch of despair, bade rouse you up in the selfsame wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they bade us to render our mother the nursing-debt again⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing that long in her womb she bare us with travail-pain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whensoever the steeds of the swift-wheeled car of the Lord of the Sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amphitritê should loose from the yoke. Howbeit it is not in me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To divine what their prophecy meaneth. They named them, that stranger-band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heroines, daughters of Libya, and Warders of the Land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, whatsoever toils we endured in our journeying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By land or by sea, said they, they were ware of everything.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer thereafter I saw them in place, but there came between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mist or a cloud⁠—they appeared, and lo! they were no more seen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and they marvelled all such tale to hear him tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to the Minyan men a most strange wonder befell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For out of the sea to the land did a horse gigantic bound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With golden mane far-streaming that tossed his shoulders around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with one swift stamp he shook from his shoulders the briny spray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And onward he galloped with feet like the blast of the wind: straightway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the throng of his comrades did Peleus rejoicing say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The steed of the car of the Lord of the Sea!⁠—unyoked hath he been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even but now by the hands of his dear-loved wife, I ween.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our mother⁠—none other is this, I divine, than the good ship there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Argo; for verily us within her womb she bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With grievous anguish of travail groaning unceasingly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her therefore with stalwart strength and with tireless shoulders we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will uplift, and afar o’er the wastes of the sandy land from the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will we bear her, where yonder steed hath with swift feet sped before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he will not, he, sink into the earth, but his hoof-prints shall go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pointing the way for us inland afar from the sea, I trow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So did he speak: of his keen-witted counsel were all they fain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, this is the song of the Muses, and I but sing their strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Pierides’ servant; and this true tale in mine ears hath been told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye, O mightiest far of the sons of the kings of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By your manhood and might o’er the sands of Libya’s desert drear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bare high over earth your galley and all her voyaging-gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On your shoulders laid, yea, bare her through long days two and ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nights as many. That cup of affliction and travail then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What tongue could tell it, which these in their toil filled up full-brim?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a truth of the blood of the Deathless they were, such labour grim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did they take on them, onward driven and on by Necessity’s goad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till afar mid the ripples of Trito’s mere how triumphantly strode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How gladly adown from their stalwart shoulders they set their load!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then rushing, like unto hounds in the wild hunt’s frenzy-burst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought they a spring, for that now was there added parching thirst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto all their affliction and manifold anguish; nor toiled they in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandering there; for lo, they came to the sacred plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where but yesterday Ladon the Serpent of Libya in Atlas’ garden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept watch o’er the Apples of Gold; and the Nymphs around their warden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Hesperides, rested never, chanting their lovely song.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now by the arrows of Herakles stricken he lay along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the trunk of the apple-tree: only the tip of his tail had strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To quiver yet, but adown from his head, through all the length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his dark chine, lifeless he lay. Where the arrows had left in his blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bitter gall of the Hydra of Lerna, a swarming brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of flies o’er the venom-festering wounds of him crawled and clung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereby the Hesperides over their golden heads had flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their white arms, shrilling their wail. And the wanderers suddenly drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anear, and to dust and to earth straightway, when the hero-crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came hastily on, did they turn even there. But Orpheus was ware</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the portent divine, and he stood, and he spake to the Nymphs in prayer:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Divine Ones, lovely and kindly, O Queens, be gracious ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether amongst the Heavenly Goddesses numbered ye be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the Earthly, or whether they name you the Lone Ones, Nymphs divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, O ye Nymphs, come, daughters of Ocean’s sacred line!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appear ye in manifest form to our longing eyes, and show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some spring gushing forth from the rock, some sacred upwelling flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the bosom of Earth, O shapes divine, that the thirst which doth burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our tongues without cease may be quenched; and if ever again we return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Achaia-land in our weariful voyaging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as to the chiefest in heaven, to you which have done this thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gifts and libations and feasts with grateful love will we bring.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, praying with earnest voice; and they from anear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pitied their pain. And first did they cause green grass to appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the earth, and above the grass rose saplings tall, and these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter in fullness of bloom grew up into fair young trees:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tall-standing and straight, high up from the face of the earth they towered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a poplar was Hesperê veiled, Erythêis an elm embowered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Aiglê a sacred willow. And out of the stems of them, lo!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared they, and like as before they had been, so again did they show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A marvel exceeding great: and Aiglê silence brake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with gentle words in their longing ears she answered and spake:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Of a surety for blessing to you and deliverance out of your toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hitherward came but now one ruthless and shameless, to spoil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our guardian serpent of life; and the Goddesses’ apples of gold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He plucked, and he bare them away, and he left us sorrowful-souled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there came yestreen a man most fell in wanton despite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grim-shapen, whose eyes ’neath his scowling brows flashed terrible light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pitiless man: in a monster lion’s fell untanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raw hide, was he clad, with a stubborn olive-wood staff in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a bow, with the arrows whereof he shot yon dragon dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he came, he also, as one that afoot overland hath sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thirst-parched: and questing for water with diligent haste he sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all this place⁠—but, I ween, he was like to behold it not!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit a certain rock by the mere Tritonian stood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, or of his own device, or a God wrought so on his mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did he smite with his foot, and forth did the water in full burst flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then down to the earth on his hands and his breast he bowed him low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out of the rifted rock an unspeakable draught he swilled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till his mighty maw, down-stooped like a beast of the field, he had filled.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she; and they right glad thence hasted, until they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the place where Aiglê had told of the spring; and they found the same.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when earth-burrowing ants swarm round their narrow pit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All hurrying to and fro, or when clustering flies, that have lit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where lieth a drop of the honey sweet, a tiny gout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insatiate-eager are thronging, so in a huddled rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Minyans round that rock-spring crowded on every side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with wet lips thus in his gladness hero to hero cried:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O strange!⁠—how hath Herakles saved his companions forspent with stress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thirst, though afar he were! Would God that he yet might bless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes of us finding him faring on through the wilderness!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then shouted in answer they which were ready-dight for the deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they parted, and this way and that way questing the lost did they speed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the tracks of the hero by winds of the night had been wholly effaced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they drifted the sand. And away did Boreas’ two sons haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Putting trust in their wings; and Euphêmus trusting his feet flying fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lynkeus the piercing glance of his eyes afar to cast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Kanthus, the fifth of the searchers, darted away with the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom the doom of the Gods and his manfulness drave to essay that quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That of Herakles’ mouth for certain tidings he so might inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where he left Polyphemus, Eilatus’ son; for with earnest desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he fain to ask of the hero concerning his lost friend’s fate:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he mid the Mysians had builded a city glorious and great;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then yearning for home came o’er him, and seeking Argo he passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far over the mainland, until he came to the land at the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sea-board Chalybans: there ’neath the mastering doom did he fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there up-piled is his grave-mound under a poplar tall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Facing the sea. But Lynkeus deemed that he spied that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over measureless spaces of land lone-faring and far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herakles⁠—saw him as one that hath seen or hath thought he hath seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon, when the month is young, through mist-veils floating between.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his comrades returned he, and told them that quester thereafter should see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hero no more as he journeyed. In like wise came those three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Euphêmus the swift of foot, and the scions twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Thracian Wind of the North, having toiled and striven in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, Kanthus, in Libya thee did the fell Fates bring to thine end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon pasturing flocks didst thou light; and the shepherd, that wont to tend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those sheep, in defending them smote thee, when thou thereof wast fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take for thy comrades’ need, and there of his hand was thou slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the cast of a stone; for in sooth no weakling there kept ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kaphaurus, the grandson of Phœbus, Lykoreia’s Lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of fair Akakallis the princess, whom Minos drave from her home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Libya to dwell, when the fruit of a God was found in her womb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His daughter she; and a glorious son unto Phœbus she bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amphithemis namèd, and Garamas⁠—twofold the names of him were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a Nymph, the Lady of Trito’s Lake, did Amphithemis wed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Nasamon’s might and Kaphaurus the strong she bare to his bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even him which smote down Kanthus, defending his sheep as he fought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet from the chieftains’ avenging hands escaped he not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they learned what deed he had done; and the Minyans sought their dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they took up the corse, and they laid him to rest in the strait earth-bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mourning, and took thereafter the slayer’s sheep for a prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There also Mopsus, Ampykus’ son, in the selfsame day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did a pitiless fate cut off. Stern doom might he nowise shun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his prophecy-lore, forasmuch as avoidance of death is there none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a dread snake lay mid the sand from the mid-noon sun to hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too sluggish to strike of his will at such as would turn aside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet would he dart full face upon one that in fear shrank back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet into whomso but once he should spit his venom black,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all that on life-sustaining earth draw living breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a cubit’s length should be left of his path to the mansion of Death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, not though the Healer God⁠—if this I may say, nor sin⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should medicine him, if only his teeth should have grazed but the skin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when over Libya flying godlike Perseus came⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is also Eurymedon; so did his mother name his name⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As unto the king the Gorgon’s head new-severed he bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatsoever to earth dropped down of the dark-red gouts of gore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All quickened, and serpents thereof of the selfsame brood did there spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now Mopsus pressed on the ridge of the spine of the deadly thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Setting his left foot-sole thereupon; and the beast in his pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Writhed round it: the flesh ’twixt ankle and calf in his fangs hath he ta’en,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he tare it, the while Medea and all her handmaids fled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In affright. Howbeit the seer was handling, nothing adread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bleeding wound; for the pain not grievously vexed his soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah wretch!⁠—for already a numbness of deadly slumber stole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unstringing his sinews: a thick mist flooded his eyes all round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway his burdened limbs all helplessly sank to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chill did he grow. And his comrades, and Aison’s son, amazed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the strokes fast-falling of doom, on the dead man thronging gazed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not for a little space, albeit but newly dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might he lie in the sun, for that fast through his flesh ’gan corruption to spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the venom: the very hair from the skin like slime was cast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore they straightway delved them a deep trench, labouring fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mattocks of brass; and in mourning thereafter their hair did they rend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both they and the maidens, bewailing the dead man’s pitiful end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the hero meetly entombed then thrice in their warrior-gear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marched they, and over his grave the earth-mound high did they rear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when now they were gone aboard of the ship, and the South-wind blew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the sea, they must needs make guess of the strait wherethrough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They should win forth out of Tritônis’ mere; neither any device</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long had they, but all day long were they drifting in aimless wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as writheth a serpent along his crooked path, when beat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rays of the sun on the land, and scorch him with fiercest heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with hissing to this side and that side he turneth his head, and his eyne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like unto sparks that leap from the furnace, glitter and shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his fury, until to his lair through a cleft of the rock he may creep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Argo, seeking a mouth of the mere, a fairway deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long time tacked to and fro. Then Orpheus suddenly spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Apollo’s massy tripod forth of the ship they should take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And propitiate the Gods of the land therewith for their home-going’s sake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So went they, and set Apollo’s goodly gift on the shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then stood before them one, the form of a youth who bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Triton the Wide-dominioned. From earth he uplifted a clod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he held it forth for his Stranger’s Gift; and spake the God:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Receive it, my friends: no gift exceeding goodly to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here have I now to give unto them which seek unto me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But and if ye inquire touching this sea’s paths⁠—as many a time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the need of men whose journeyings pass through an alien clime⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will tell you, seeing Poseidon hath made me to understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sea, for that he is my father, and I am the king of the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the sea⁠—if perchance to your ears from afar Eurypylus’ name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of the Land of the Beasts of Ravin, from Libya came.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Euphêmus outstretched his hands right joyfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gift of the clod to receive, and answering thus spake he:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If thou peradventure of Atthis and Minos’ sea dost know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hero, to us who inquire the truth unfailing show.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not of our will have we hitherward come, but the tempests’ might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath hurled us afar, on the borders of this your land to light:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our galley, shoulder-uplifted, a weary burden, I wis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the desert we bare to the waves of thy mere. But we know not this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby we shall sail thereout to win unto Pelops’ land.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and afar that other pointed, outstretching his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sea, and the mouth of the deep-channelled mere, and he spake the word:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo, yonder lieth the path to the sea, where the deeps unstirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkest are gleaming: on either hand roll breakers white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green-glimmering under their shivering crests, and on forthright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the lane of the breakers a straight path lieth to win from the mere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yon sea misty in distance beyond Crete stretcheth clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sacred land of Pelops. But rightward still steer ye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When forth of the mere ye have thrust, and ye ride on the swell of the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so long speed ye onward your course, close-hugging the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till ye come to an inland-trending gulf; and then shall ye stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boldly across to the ness where endeth the sweep of the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond. Therefrom shall your course be perplexity-troubled no more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now pass on your way rejoicing: let no man grieve the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That your limbs must labour, while yet ye have strength of your youth for toil.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With kindly counsel he spake; and they hied them aboard once more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With intent to get them forth of the mere by toil of the oar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sped they with eager purpose: and now did Triton take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his shoulder the mighty tripod; and now did he enter the lake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they saw:⁠—but thereafter did no man mark how he vanished from sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the tripod, anigh though he were. Then each man’s heart grew light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that now for their helping had met them one of the Gods ever-blest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they cried unto Aison’s son to take of their sheep the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to sacrifice to the God, and to chant the hymn of praise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then straightway he chose it in haste, and the victim on high did he raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slew it there on the stern, and the sacrifice-prayer he cried:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou God, who hast manifested thyself on the mere’s lone side⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether Triton the great sea-marvel thou be, or whether thy name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be Phorkys or Nereus mid Sea-nymphs of Nereus’ loins which came⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be gracious thou, and vouchsafe heart-gladdening home-return.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So praying he severed the throat of the victim, and down from the stern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the waves did he cast it. Out of the deep yet again did he rise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his own true form as a God was he manifest unto their eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when one traineth a fleet-foot steed for the broad race-course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasping the flowing mane of the hest-obeying horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Running lightly beside him, while high he is arching his neck in his pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And followeth on, and the gleaming bit, as from side to side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rolleth it ’twixt his champing jaws, is clashing and ringing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so with his hand to the keel of hollow Argo clinging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seaward he thrust her; and all his form, from the stately crown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his head, over back and waist and navel, thus far down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was his wondrous shape even such as the Gods ever-blessèd are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But down from his loins the tail of a sea-beast lengthened far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forking to this side and that, and he lashed the face of the tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his spines, which parted below into fins outcurving wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fashion like to the horns of the moon when the month is new.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward he drave her, till sped from the thrust of his hand she flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sea: then sank he mid fathomless depths, and the heroes all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouted, whose eyes beheld that awesome marvel befall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is the haven of Argo, and there are the signs of her stay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There stand to Poseidon and Triton altars unto this day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as for that day tarried they there. But with sail outspread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the dawning again before the West-wind’s breath they fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever they kept the while that desert land to the right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the morning thereafter the ness they beheld, and the long sea-bight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inland-trending beyond that seaward-jutting ness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then straightway the West-wind failed them, but blew the breath no less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the cloudless South; and their hearts rejoiced, in the sail as it sighed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun went down, and uprose the star of the folding-tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bringeth from labour rest unto ploughmen toil-fordone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then, when the wind died down as the darkling night drew on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Furled they the idle sail, and the mast exceeding tall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lowered, and now to the toil of the polished oar did they fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All through the night and the day, and, when failed the light of the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the night thereafter, till rugged Karpathos far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcomed them: thence did they shape their course unto where rose high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crete above all the rest of the isles in the sea which lie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There Talos, the man of brass, from the stubborn scaur as he tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rock-shards, withstood them from making the hawsers fast to the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When came to the roadstead of Dirkê’s haven the sea-worn ones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now he was the last of the brazen stock of the Ash-tree’s sons:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the days of the Sons of the Gods none other on earth abode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him on Europa to guard her island Kronion bestowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice round Crete each day with his brazen feet he strode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in all the rest of his body and limbs was he fashioned of brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which might not be broken: howbeit a blood-red vein there was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his ankle beneath the sinew, and guarded therewithin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the issues of life and of death by nought save a film of skin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the men were with travail outworn, yet aloof from the land drew they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ship with the backward sweep of the oars, in exceeding dismay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the outsea now from Crete had they turned them in plight forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tormented with thirst, and by all their travail-pain outworn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, even as they turned them, Medea spake to the hero-crew:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear me: alone, I ween, can I for your helping subdue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yon man, whosoever he be, though fashioned of brass all through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be his body, except he have life everlasting added thereto.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But consent ye to keep hereby your galley beyond the flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his stones, till he yield unto me his overmastered might.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then backed they the galley, beyond the cast of his arm, to rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the oars; and they waited to see what counsel, of all unguessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She would bring to pass. Then on either side of her cheeks did she hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a veil before her face her purple mantle’s fold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then up to the deck she went, and her hand did Aison’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasp in his own, and from thwart to thwart so led her on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the spell-chant raised she: the Fates with singing invoked she there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devourers of souls, swift hounds of Hades, through all the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which be hovering ever, and swoop on the doomed the living among.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowing the knee unto these three times she invoked them with song,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice with prayer; and with soul unto mischief shapen she cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The glance of the evil eye upon Talos, his vision to blast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her teeth gnashed fury accursèd upon him, the arms of her waved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beckonings of doom, as of one that in frenzy of hatred raved.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Zeus Father, awe as a wind on my spirit bloweth chill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeing how by disease not alone, nor by wounds, the doom of ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meeteth us, yea, how one from afar shall work our bane!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as he, though brazen, yielded yet to be slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the might of Medea the sorceress. Then, as he heaved on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The massy rocks to withstand them from coming the haven anigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a spur of the crag did he graze his heel, and the ichor-flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like melting lead gushed forth: nor long thereafter he stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Towering up on the rock out-jutting that frowned o’er the brine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, even as high on the mountain side a giant pine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which the woodmen have left, when adown from the forest at even they hie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the keen axe half hewn through⁠—as the winds of the night pass by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shivereth first in the blast, and swayeth; but, snapt ere long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the stump, down falleth; so he on his feet all tireless-strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a little space yet stood, yet swayed he to and fro.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter all strengthless fell with a mighty crash their foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that night there on the shore of Crete did the heroes lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thereafter, so soon as the glow of the dawn overflushed the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fane to Athênê Minôïs builded they thereby.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then water they drew them, and hied them aboard, that with oars swift-sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before all else they might pass beyond Salmônê’s Head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But even as they ran over Crete’s wide sea, all suddenly came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A horror of darkness on them, which the Pall of Blackness they name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Night of Destruction. No stars shone through it, no faint ray gleamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the moon: black chaos from heaven descended, or haply upstreamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkness that might be felt from the depths of the nethermost hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whether through Hades they drifted, or heaved on the waters’ swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nowise they knew; but unto the sea in helpless despair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They committed their home-return, to bear as it would. But in prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cried Jason with mighty voice, and to Phœbus his hands did he raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling on him to save them, the while the tears ran down his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his trouble. To Pytho and Amyklae promised he once and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Offerings unnumbered to bear, and gifts to Ortygia’s fane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou, O Lêto’s son, wast swift to hear: from on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Melas’ rocks thou descendedst, amidst of the sea which lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twin peaks hath the isle: upon one thereof didst thou dart, and stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifting on high thy golden bow in a God’s right hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashed round thee on every side the bow’s bright splendour-sheen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then of the voyagers’ eyes was a little island seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Sporades, overagainst Hippuris’ tiny isle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There cast they anchor, and waited: and soon Dawn’s rosy smile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flushed up through the sky. In a tree-shadowed dell to Apollo they made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A goodly hallowed place, and an altar mid twilight of shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Splendour-god, because of the splendour that far-seen flamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Phœbus they called; and Anaphê, “Isle of Revealing,” they named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rock, for that Phœbus revealed it to men bewildered sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they sacrificed whatso men might provide on a desolate shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sacrifice: but when, for that wine they had none, they shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water over the brands on the altar glowing red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Medea’s Phaeacian maidens beholding them could not refrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The laughter their bosoms within any more; for that oxen slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sacrifice in Alcinoüs’ halls had they seen full oft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the heroes with mirthful hearts cast back their railing, and scoffed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gibing words: and so, like the flame’s light-flickering play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashed taunts ’twixt these and contention of jesting. And unto this day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the old song-sport of the heroes, in that isle women fling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even such light scoffs at the men when gifts of atonement they bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Apollo the Splendour-god, unto Anaphê’s Warder-king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when thence they had loosed the hawsers, when summer-winds blew light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did Euphêmus call to remembrance a dream of the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his awe of the glorious son of Maia. For lo, him thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the god-given clod in his palm close unto his breast he had caught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefrom like a suckling babe white streams of milk it drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the clod, for all that so little it were, to a woman grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a virgin. In love’s embrace, by desire overborne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did he lie with the damsel: yet even as a maiden for ruth did he mourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have humbled her whom the very milk of his breast had fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she with unangry words spake comfort to him, and she said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Offspring of Triton am I, and the nurse of thy children to be:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No maid, dear friend; for that Triton and Libya gave birth unto me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But me to the maidens the Daughters of Nereus do thou restore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dwell in the sea nigh Anaphê’s isle. I shall rise once more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the light of the sun, for thy children’s children a home prepared.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now his heart called this to remembrance; and all that dream he declared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Aison’s son: then he mused in his soul on a prophecy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Smiter from Far, and he uttered his thought, and thus spake he:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O strange!⁠—of a surety a weird of glorious renown is thine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Gods shall make this clod, when thou castest it into the brine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An island, wherein thy children’s children hereafter shall live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this was the stranger’s-gift which Triton did freely give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thine hand on the Libyan shore. Of the Gods that abide for aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None other was he who gave, when he met thee there in the way.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and Euphêmus set not at nought that answering word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his heart for the Aisonid’s oracle-promise was gladness-stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he cast ’mid the surges the clod. Thence rose up an isle from the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kallistê, the sacred nurse of Euphêmus’ children to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in Sintian Lemnos wont to dwell in the ancient days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from Lemnos were driven forth by men of Tyrrhenian race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to Sparta as suppliants came they: from Sparta fared they on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until they were led of Thôras, Autesion’s mighty son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Kallistê: then changed they its name, and Thôra the isle did they call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their chief:⁠—but after Euphêmus’ days did this befall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thence parting, unhindered o’er long sea-rollers untold did they fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they stayed on Aigina’s beach; and in innocent rivalry there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hero with hero contended, the while the water they drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who first should draw it, and who to the ship win first of the crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their need, and withal the fresh strong breeze, bade hasten away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore it cometh that yet do the youths of the Myrmidons lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On their shoulders the jars full-brimmed, and burdened so do they speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With light-running feet o’er the race-course striving for victory’s meed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Be gracious, O blest generation of chieftains!⁠—may these lays ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Year after year in the ears of men ever sweeter to sing!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now at the last am I come to the glorious ending of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bourne of your travail: for struggle nor strife did thereafter befall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto you, as homeward-bound from Aigina did Argo flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither tempest of winds brake forth; but over a peaceful sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the land of Kekrops, by Aulis coasting, and under the lee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Eubœa, by cities Opuntian of Lokrian men did ye fleet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till with rapture of welcome on Pagasae’s strand ye set your feet.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
