<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Come, Erato, now, stand by me: of thy lips let me be taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In what manner thereafter Jason the Fleece to Iolkos brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the love of Medea: for thou in the things by the Cyprian ordained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast part, and maidens unwedded by thine enchantments are chained;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore it is that a name that telleth of love thou hast gained.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So there in the close-pleached covert of river-reeds unseen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did the heroes in ambush wait. Then marked them Hêrê the queen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Athênê withal; and aloof from Zeus’ self turned they aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rest of the Gods everlasting, and into a chamber they hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For counsel: and first spake Hêrê, to try Athênê therein:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thyself now first, O daughter of Zeus, our counsel begin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What needeth to do? Wilt thou frame some subtle device, that these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May win from Aiêtes and bear unto Hellas the Golden Fleece?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with words shall they overpersuade him, with soft speech melt him to ruth?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now nay, for a proud and haughty scorner he is in sooth:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet it may not in any wise be that our emprise turn aside.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So did she speak; and straightway to her Athênê replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea, mine heart even as thine herein was pondering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When with questions thou searchedst me, Hêrê. Howbeit, as touching the thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not yet in mine heart have I found this wile, which shall help the need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the soul of the chieftains: and yet have I mused upon many a rede.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; and their eyes on the threshold before their feet they cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they pondered of this and of that, till Hêrê cried at the last⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a thought in her heart had birth, and her word was first again:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Let us hence to the Cyprian Queen; and when we be come, we twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will pray her to bid her son, if perchance he will do this deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Aiêtes’ sorceress-daughter a shaft from his bow to speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bewitch her with love for Jason: by her devising, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing the Fleece away unto Hellas the hero shall go.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; and her counsel of wisdom pleased Athênê well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she answered⁠—and now from her lips soft words of persuasion fell:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hêrê, my father begat me unweeting of shafts of love:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing I know of desire, or the magic spells thereof.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if this word pleaseth thyself, of a truth will I go with thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet thou must speak our request when the Cyprian’s face we see.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then soared they away, and unto the mighty palace they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Kypris: her lord the Halt-foot God had builded the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his bride, when he led her forth from the halls of Zeus of yore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they entered the courts, and under the chamber-corridor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood, where the hands of the Goddess the couch of Hephaistus prepared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he at the dawning thence to his forges and anvils had fared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cavern wide of a sea-washed isle, where he aye wrought on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the fire-blasts fashioning manifold marvels: but she alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Facing the doors of the palace sat in a carven chair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over her shoulders white had she loosened the waves of her hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a golden comb through their ripples she drew, and now would she braid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long plaits up; but before her beheld she the twain, and she stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hand, and she rose from her throne, and she bade them within her hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on couches she caused them to sit; thereafter herself withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat down, and her uncombed tresses coiled she about her head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smiling innocent-arch to the Goddesses twain she said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Dear sisters, what purpose or need hath brought you hither at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who have tarried so long afar? Why come ye? In days overpast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not oft hath your presence been here⁠—too great for such as I!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then unto her did Hêrê with stately speech reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou mockest, the while our heart with calamity’s shadow is dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that even now in Phasis the river moored is the bark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aison’s son, and the rest on the Quest of the Fleece that have come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all their sakes⁠—for that nigh is the deed and the hour of doom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exceeding sorely we fear, but most for Aison’s son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him I⁠—yea, though unto Hades now he were voyaging on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break those fetters of brass wherewithal Ixion is bound⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will deliver, so far as strength in these my limbs is found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest Pelias should laugh, having ’scaped the doom, his iniquity’s price,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who in pride of his heart hath left me unhonoured with sacrifice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and before that Jason was passing dear unto me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even since, when Anaurus’ outfall in full flood poured to the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the day when men’s heart-righteousness fain would I prove and know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming back from the hunting he met me; and all overmantled with snow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the mountain-ridges and towering peaks, and adown from them poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The winter-tide floods, and the rolling torrents rattled and roared;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he pitied the grey old crone, and he took me up at my prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over the seaward-madding flood on his shoulders he bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore I honour him now, and will honour: unharmed shall he be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pelias’ spite⁠—yea, though his return be unaided of thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she: the lips of Kypris could frame no word for a space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her awe to behold great Hêrê asking of her a grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with courteous-gentle speech then spake she answering:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Goddess dread, may there never be found any viler thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Kypris, if I shall set at naught desire of thine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or in word or in deed, whatsoever these frail hands of mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May avail; and for all that I do nor thank nor requital would I.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she; and Hêrê again in her wisdom made reply:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is nowise for lack of might that we come, nor of strength of hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thou to thy child in peaceful quietness speak thy command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bewitch Aiêtes’ daughter with love for Aison’s seed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if she with her counsel shall help him, with loving favour lead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightly, I ween, shall the hero win the Fleece of Gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And return to Iolkos, seeing the maiden is subtle-souled.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So did she speak; and the Lady of Cyprus answered thereto:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hêrê, Athênê, my child would render obedience to you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than to me: in your presence a little abashed shall he be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold boy though he be:⁠—but nothing at all he regardeth me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever he striveth against me, and laugheth mine hests to scorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, I am minded, by that his naughtiness overborne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His evil-sounding shafts and his bow therewithal to break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full in his sight: for of late this threat in his anger he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, if I refrained not mine hands while his passion within him was strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My scathe upon mine own head should be, upon me the wrong.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she: the Goddesses smiled, and each in her fellow’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked: but again she spake, and her speech was burdened with sighs:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Unto others my griefs be for laughter alone, and I ought not so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell them to all:⁠—enough that mine heart must its bitterness know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit, if this be all your soul’s desire this day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will try, and with soft words win him: he shall not say me nay.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake; and with touch caressing did Hêrê her slim hand take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, softly smiling the while, she answered, and thus she spake:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Even so, Kythereia, with speed perform thou this our request</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou sayest; and vex not thyself, neither strive with angered breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy child: from his troubling of thee hereafter shalt thou have rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and she rose from her seat, and Athênê passed at her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As forth they sped and away, they twain: but the Cyprian hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Olympus, and down its ridges, seeking her child, she passed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in Zeus’s fruitful orchard-close she found him at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not alone, Ganymedes was with him, the boy whom Zeus on a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From earth unto heaven had brought to abide with Immortals for aye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he greatly desired his beauty. With golden dice these two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were playing, even as boys like-minded be wont to do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And already Eros the greedy the palm of his left hand pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled full with the golden spoils of his winning, against his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing upright; the while a sweet flush mantled and glowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the bloom of his cheeks: but the other was crouching on bent knees bowed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In downcast silence: he had but twain; on the earth he flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One after other, by Eros’s gibing laughter stung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, even as fared the former, he lost them, the last of his dice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with empty and helpless hands he went; and his down-drooped eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marked not the coming of Kypris. Before her child did she stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with loving chiding she spake, as she laid on his lips her hand:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why smil’st thou in triumph, thou naughty varlet? Hast thou not beguiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy playmate?⁠—and fairly hast thou overcome that innocent child?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go to now, accomplish my bidding, the thing that I shall ask;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the plaything exceeding fair of Zeus shall requite thy task,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which was fashioned by Adresteia his nurse for her babe’s delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, a child, he thought as a child, in the cave ’neath Ida’s height.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A ball fair-rounded it is: no goodlier toy, I wot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couldst thou get thee mid all the marvels by hands of Hephaistus wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold be the zones of it fashioned; and round each several one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twofold be the seams of broidery-thread that encircling run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the stitches thereof be hidden: there coileth around them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A spiral of blue. From thine hand if thou cast it on high, that ball</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as a star shall flash through the air in a fiery glow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This will I give thee⁠—but thou must bewitch with a shaft from thy bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiêtes’ daughter with love for Jason. But see that herein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou tarry not; else a meaner requital than this shalt thou win.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and welcome the word was; with gladness he heard that thing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he cast away those toys, and with eager hands did he cling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clasping the Goddess’s raiment about on either side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he pleaded with her even then to bestow it: but Kypris replied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gentle words⁠—and his cheeks unto hers she drew the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clasping him close she kissed him, and answer she made with a smile:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be witness now thy beloved head, yea, also mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I will not defraud thee: indeed and in truth the gift shall be thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the heart of Aiêtes’ daughter is pierced by thine arrow divine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then gathered he up his dice, and the tale of them heedfully told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he cast them into his mother’s glistering bosom-fold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his baldric of gold he slung from his shoulder the quiver that leant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a tree-trunk, and took the bow for sorrow of mortals bent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fruitful orchard of Zeus’s palace forth did he fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereafter came to Olympus’ portals high in air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence is a sheer-descending path from the height of the sky;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there the Poles, twin mountains, uplift their heads on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Precipice-steeps, earth’s loftiest-towering crests, whereon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his earliest rays at the dawning uplifted resteth the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far under, the life-sustaining earth and the cities slept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, and the sacred rivers; anon before him upleapt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hill-peaks, and outspread the sea, through the wide air on as he swept.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the heroes apart on the thwarts of their galley in ambush yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the backwater gleamed of the river, for taking of counsel were met:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the son of Aison himself was speaking, and all they heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As row upon row in their places they sat, and none spake word:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, of a truth the thing that seemeth good in mine eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will I utter; howbeit with you the fulfilment lies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Quest all share, and in counsel and speech all ye have part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whosoever in silence withholdeth his rede and the thoughts of his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him know, he only bereaveth of home-return our Quest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I counsel that ye by the ship with your war-gear abide at rest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I, even I, will go forth first to Aiêtes’ hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will take but the sons of Phrixus, and twain of the rest therewithal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, when I meet him, with words will first make trial, to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he haply for lovingkindness the Fleece of Gold will bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or will grant it not, but in pride of his might will set us at naught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For so, when the lesson of evil first by himself hath been taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall we then advise us, whether the ordeal of battle to try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if other device shall avail us, refraining the onset-cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let us not rashly, or ever persuasion be put to the test,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despoil this man of his own possession:⁠—nay, it were best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To come before him, and first with speech his grace to win:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, oft fair speech hath prevailed in a matter, and lightly⁠—wherein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little had prowess availed⁠—for that winsomely it stole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the heart: yea hereby Phrixus wrought on the grim king’s soul,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a stepdame’s guile and the sacrifice-stroke of a father he fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To receive him: in no man’s breast is shame so utterly dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he honoureth Guest-ward Zeus, and regardeth his ordinance dread.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then praised they with one accord the counsel of Aison’s seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor did any man turn therefrom, to utter another rede.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then called he on Phrixus’ children to follow, and chose of his band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telamon and Augeias; moreover himself took Hermes’ wand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forthright from the ship over water and reed-fringed river-side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed they, and out beyond o’er the swell of the plain they hied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Plain Kirkaian, I wot, is it called, and, row upon row,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Willows and osiers there exceeding many grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid their topmost branches cord-bound corpses be hanging there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to Kolchians unto this day an abomination it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To burn on the pyre their men which have died; nor yet in the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is their wont to lay them, and heap thereover the token-mound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in hides untanned of oxen they roll them, and hang midst trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without the city. Yet earth hath equal share in these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the air; for in graves of the earth be they wont their women to lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, this is their custom, and this their ordinance for aye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, anigh as they drew, did Hêrê with loving thought for the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread thick mist all through the city, that so they might ’scape the ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the thousands there, to Aiêtes’ hall while fared they on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when from the plain to Aiêtes’ city and palace they won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then straightway Hêrê scattered again that cloudy haze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the entrance they stood, and they looked on the courts of the king in amaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the gateways wide, and the columns that all around the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ordered lines uprose; and high on the roofs of the halls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did a coping of stone upon rows of brazen triglyphs lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over the threshold in peace they went. And hard thereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were garden-vines in fulness of blossom, mantled o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With green leaves, high uplifted in air. And fountains four</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever-flowing beneath them ran, which were delved with magic spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Hephaistus, the one whereof did with gushing of milk upwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the second with wine, and the third with incense-breathing oil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with water the fourth ran; steaming for heat did the same upboil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the setting-tide of the Pleiads; but out of its rock-hewn cave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold even as ice in their rising-season bubbled the wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even such were the marvellous works that Hephaistus the craftwise God</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashioned within Kytaian Aiêtes’ palace-abode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he wrought for him brazen-footed bulls, and their mouths were of brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the terrible splendour of blazing flame the breath of them was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moreover a plough of unbending adamant, all in one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did he forge for him, making therein his requital of thanks to the Sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who had taken him up in his chariot, faint from the Phlegra fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There also was builded the inner court, and around it were pight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many chambers on either hand with two-leaved doors fair-dight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And without them a rich-wrought corridor ran to left and to right;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And athwart them the loftiest buildings rose upon either side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereof one over its fellows uplifted its crest of pride:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therein with his queen Aiêtes abode, the lord of the land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereby did the mansion fair of his son Absyrtus stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom a Nymph Caucasian, Asterodeia, bare to his bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ever he led Eiduia home, his wife true-wed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter of Tethys and Ocean, even their youngest one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the sons of the Kolchians gave him a new name, Phaëthon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The Shining,” for all the youths were in beauty by him outshone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rest did the handmaid-train and Aiêtes’ daughters abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chalkiopê and Medea. And now had Medea hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her chamber forth to her sister’s; for Hêrê restrained her that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she went not abroad: but little she wont theretofore to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the palace, but all day long in the temple of Hekatê</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her conversation she had, for the Goddess’s priestess was she.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she saw them, and cried aloud; and suddenly heard was her call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Chalkiopê: and her handmaids down at their feet let fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their yarn and their threads, and forth of the chamber ran they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a throng, and amidst them the mother: and there beholding her sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She cast up her hands in her gladness; and those re-given ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greeted their mother, and lovingly gazed on her, folding her round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their arms, till her words mid sobbings broken utterance found:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So then ye were not to leave me in lonely childless pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to wander afar; and fate hath turned you backward again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hapless I!⁠—what yearning for Hellas awoke in your breasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By some strange woeful madness, at Phrixus your father’s behests?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bitter affliction did he ordain, when dying he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mine heart!⁠—O why to Orchomenus’ city far away⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whosoe’er this Orchomenus be⁠—for Athamas’ wealth should ye go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving your mother alone to bear her burden of woe?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and last came forth Aiêtes hastening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came Eiduia herself, the wife of Aiêtes the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the outcry of Chalkiopê she heard. And the court straightway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was filled with a noisy throng; for some of the thralls ’gan flay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A huge ox, some with the brass ’gan cleave the billets dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some with the fire ’gan heat the baths. There was none thereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lagged in his task, as they toiled beneath that stern king’s eye.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Eros the while through the mist-grey air passed all unseen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Troubling them, even as heifers that hear the piping keen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the gadfly⁠—“the breese” do the herders of oxen name the thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the forecourt beneath the lintel swiftly his bow did he string:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his quiver took he a shaft sigh-laden, unshot before:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With swift feet all unmarked hath he passed the threshold o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keen-glancing around: he hath glided close by Aison’s son:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath grasped the string in the midst, and the arrow-notch laid thereon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway he strained it with both hands sundered wide apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he shot at Medea; and speechless amazement filled her heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the God himself from the high-roofed hall forth-flashing returned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughing aloud. Deep down in the maiden’s bosom burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arrow like unto flame; and at Aison’s son she cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Side-glances of love evermore; and panted hard and fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath its burden the heart in her breast, nor did any remembrance remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aught beside, but her soul was melted with rapturous pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as some poor daughter of toil, who hath distaff ever in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heapeth the slivers of wood about a blazing brand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To lighten her darkness with splendour her rafters beneath, when her eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have prevented the dawn; and the flame, upleaping in wondrous wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the one little torch, ever waxing consumeth all that heap;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So, burning in secret, about her heart did he coil and creep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love the destroyer: her soft cheeks’ colour went and came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale now, and anon, through her soul’s confusion, with crimson aflame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when ready-dight was the banquet by labour of handmaid and thrall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by steaming baths’ refreshment their faces were lightened withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladly they feasted and drank till their souls were satisfied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter unto the sons of his daughter Aiêtes cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this was the word of his mouth, as inquisition he made:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye sons of my daughter and Phrixus, the man unto whom I paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour above all men that have stood mine halls within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How came ye to Aia returning?⁠—did some dark curse of sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Break short in the midst your escape? Ye would not hear nor obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me, when I set before you the endless length of the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I marked it, when once I was whirled in my father the Sun-god’s car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the day wherein he wafted my sister Kirkê afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Hesperia-land, till the chariot at last made stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Tyrrhene mainland-shore, where even unto this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She abideth, exceeding far from the land where the Kolchians dwell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What profit or pleasure in words? Speak out and plainly tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What happed in the midst of your journey, and say who these men be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That have come with you hither. And where from your galley ashore came ye?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So did he question; and answered him Argus before the rest⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his heart misgave him concerning the son of Aison’s quest;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With soft words spake he, seeing that he was the elder-born:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aiêtes, that our ship full quickly asunder was torn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By stormy blasts, and we, unto beams of the wreck as we clung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the beach of the War-god’s Isle by the sweep of the surges were flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the murky night. Some God from destruction redeemed us, I trow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For even the birds of Ares, that wont to haunt ere now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That desolate isle of the sea, even these we found no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these men drave them away when they landed the day before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their galley: and there by the purpose of Zeus, compassionate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our plight, were they kept from departing, or bound peradventure by fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway to our need with food and with raiment they ministered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So soon as the name of Phrixus the far-renowned they heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and thine own: for unto thy town be they voyaging.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if thou wouldst know their need, I will hide not from thee the thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A certain king being fain with exceeding vehement spite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his land and possessions to drive this man, forasmuch as in might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his hands he was peerless amongst the heroes of Aiolus’ seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sendeth him hither on desperate venture. For fate had decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Aiolus’ line shall escape not the soul-afflicting ire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of implacable Zeus, and his wrath, and the curse unendurably dire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the vengeance for Phrixus, till cometh to Hellas the Fleece of Gold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his ship did Pallas Athênê fashion: not such is her mould</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the fashioning is of the ships that be found ’mid the Kolchian folk⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereof our hap was the vilest, for even at a touch it broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the raging surge and the wind;⁠—but this ship holdeth fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gripped by her bolts, through the buffeting fury of every blast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftly alike she runneth before the wind, and when</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She is sped by the oars unresting in hands of stalwart men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath gathered within her whatso mightiest heroes there are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Achaia-land, and hath come to thy city from wandering far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By cities, by dread sea-gulfs, if thou haply wouldst grant his request,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the thing he desireth may be: for nowise he cometh to wrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aught from thine hands by force: he is minded to pay unto thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair quittance for this thy gift. Of the bitter enmity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Sauromatai hath he heard; he will quell them to bow to thy sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their name and their lineage, if fain thou wouldst hear them, as thou dost say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What men they be, I will tell to thee all in order due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man, for whose helping assembled from Hellas a hero-crew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jason they call him, the son of Aison, Krêtheus’ seed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, if this man of Krêtheus’ lineage cometh in very deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a truth by the father’s blood shall he be of kin unto us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that Krêtheus and Athamas both were the children of Aiolus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Phrixus moreover was child of Athamas, Aiolus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if aught thou know’st of the Sun-god’s seed, lo, here is one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Augeias; and Telamon this, the son of the mighty in fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiakus; yea, and of Zeus’s loins great Aiakus came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in like wise all the rest, which have hither companioned his way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons and the grandsons they are of the Gods which abide for aye.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So Argus spake: but the wrath of the king waxed hot as he heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his soul like a stormy sea with a tempest of fury was stirred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fuming he spake⁠—with the sons of his daughter above the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he wroth, for he weened that of these had Jason been moved to the Quest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the light of his anger leapt from his eyes as levin-flame:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And will ye not straightway be gone from my sight, ye felons of shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And depart from the land afar with the guile of your treachery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere a bitter Fleece and a bitter Phrixus here ye see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With your friends back faring to Hellas? Not for the Fleece come ye!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, but my sceptre and kingly honour ye come to take!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, if ye had broken not bread at my table or ever ye spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your tongues had I surely cut out, and had hewn from the wrist each hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had sent you forth with naught but your feet to fare through the land:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So should ye refrain you thereafter from coming on suchlike quest!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, and the lies ye have spoken concerning the Gods ever-blest!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So passioned the king: but even to its depths the spirit burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aiakus’ son, and hotly his soul within him yearned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fling back a deadly defiance. But Jason, or ever he spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stayed him, and gently speaking an answer of peace did he make:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bear with me, Aiêtes, as touching this Quest: no such wild dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy city and halls hath brought us as thou peradventure dost deem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought such do we covet:⁠—what man of his will, from an alien to wrest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His possessions, would fare over such wide seas? By the ruthless behest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a tyrannous king was I hitherward sent, and the doom of a God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show favour to this our entreaty; and so will I publish abroad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy name and thy glory all Hellas through. Yea, ready we are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To render for this unto thee requital of service in war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether it be that ye fain would bow the Sauromatans’ pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under your sceptred sway, or whatso nation beside.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then ceased he, with gentle utterance proffering love: but the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A twofold purpose the while in his soul was pondering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether to make assault on them then and there, and to slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or to put their might to the test. And he counted the better way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus as he pondered, the second, and answered in subtlety:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger, what hast thou to do to tell all this unto me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if ye be seed of the Gods in truth, or if ye which have hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the aliens’ land be peers of Aiêtes in aught beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will give thee to bear away, if thou wilt, the Fleece of Gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first I have tried thee. Nought I begrudge to the hero-souled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as ye tell me of him that in Hellas beareth sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the test of your valour and prowess shall be a certain essay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which mine own hands compass, fraught though it be with deadly bane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two brazen-footed bulls have I: on the War-god’s plain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They pasture: the breath from their mouths in flames of fire doth stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These yoke I, and drive through the War-god’s stubborn glebe that team,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four ploughgates; and even to the end my ploughshare cleaveth it fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No seed of the Lady of Corn in the furrows thereof do I cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the teeth of a terrible serpent; and up from the earth they grow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fashion of armèd men; but straightway I lay them low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the thrusts of my spear, as around me they throng, a battle-ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the dawning I yoke my team, and I cease from mine harvesting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the eventide hour. And thou, if thou bring such deeds to pass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day shalt win this Fleece, as thy king’s commandment was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I give it thee not ere then; neither hope it; for shame should it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That a mighty champion should yield to a man that is worser than he.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he: but silent the hero sat, with his eyes on the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speechless he sat: no help for the desperate evil he found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long time he communed with his heart; no way through the darkness gleamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take on him stoutly the task, for a mighty deed it seemed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But late and at last he spake, and he answered warily:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Full straitly, Aiêtes, within thy right art thou shutting me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet this will I dare, this emprise mighty beyond all thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, though my doom be to die: for a man may light upon nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More dread to encounter than ruthless fate’s overmastering hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which hitherward also constrained me to come at a king’s command.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, filled with despair; but the king made answer to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sore troubled there as he sat, with words exceeding grim:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come then to the gathering, thou who art fain this toil to essay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if thou shalt fear on the necks of the oxen the yoke to lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if from the deadly harvesting backward thou shrink in dismay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then will I look unto this, that another, taught by thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May shudder to come in such malapert sort to a mightier than he.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Roundly he spake, and he ceased; and Jason uprose from his seat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Augeias and Telamon with him; but followed them only the feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Argus; for even at the moment a sign to his brethren he cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There in their place to tarry: so forth of the hall they passed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the son of Aison outshone all there in wondrous wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In goodlihead and in grace: ever wandered the maiden’s eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Askance unto him, as she stealthily parted her veil’s soft gleam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her heart was a smouldering fire of pain; and her soul, as a dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stole after her love, flitting still in his track as his feet fared on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they from the halls in exceeding vexation of spirit are gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Chalkiopê, from the wrath of Aiêtes shrinking in dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastily unto her bower with those her sons had fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Medea thereafter followed; and surged like a rushing river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thoughts through her breast⁠—the thoughts that Love awakeneth ever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And before her eyes the vision of all evermore she had⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself, even like as he was, and the vesture wherein he was clad,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How he spake, how he sat on his seat, how forth of the doors he strode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she dreamed as she mused that all the world beside had showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None other such man. In her ears evermore the music rung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his voice, and the words that in sweetness of honey had dropped from his tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she trembled for him, lest the bulls or Aiêtes himself might slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her beloved, and took up a mourning for him, as though he lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead even now; and adown her cheeks soft-stealing tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowed, of her measureless pity, her burden of haunting fears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she mourned, and the low lamentation wailed from her tortured breast:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, wretch that I am, is this anguish upon me?⁠—or be he the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heroes, who now is to perish, or be he the vilest of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him go to his doom!⁠—yet O that on him no scathe might fall!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh might it be so, thou Daughter of Perseus, Goddess revered!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh might he but win home, ’scaping his doom!⁠—but if this be his weird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the bulls to be overmastered, or ever it be too late</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might he know it, that I be not forced to exult o’er the thing that I hate!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So was the maiden distraught by the cares that racked her mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when those others had left the folk and the city behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the path whereby at the first from the river-plain they had gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then, and with these words, Argus spake unto Aison’s son:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This counsel of mine, O Aison’s son, thou wilt haply despise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in desperate strait to forbear from the trial seemeth not wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast heard me tell of a maiden that practiseth sorcery</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the teaching of Perseus’ daughter Hekatê.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now if we might win her to help us, thou needest not fear any more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be vanquished in this thine endeavour:⁠—howbeit my fear is sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest haply my mother will take not upon her to move her thereto.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in any wise back will I wend to essay what entreaty may do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For over us all alike is destruction hanging this day.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he in kindness of heart, and in answer did Jason say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dear friend, if this seemeth good in thy sight, I say not nay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten thou then, and with words of weight to thy mother pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till thou stir her to help us:⁠—howbeit a pitiful hope is the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our home-return, if this in the keeping of women must rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he; and soon to the backwater came he: with hearts full fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did their comrades greet them, and question, beholding them again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But unto them Aison’s son in heaviness spake the word:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, the heart of Aiêtes the ruthless is wholly stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anger against us: of all those things whereof ye inquire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor for me nor for you appeareth the goal of our desire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two brazen-footed bulls on the War-god’s plain, he saith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pasture; in flames of fire from the mouths of them streameth the breath:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with these must I plough him ploughgates four of a fallow field;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seed of a serpent’s jaws will he give, and for crop shall it yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth-born warriors in harness of brass. In the selfsame day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These must I slay. And of this⁠—for I found no better way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mine heart as I pondered⁠—I promised outright to make essay.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and it seemed unto all an impossible task. For a space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silent they sat, and each man gazed in his fellow’s face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By despair bowed down, by calamity crushed, till Peleus at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stout words spake to hearten the heroes all aghast:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Full time is it now to be counselling what we shall do. In rede</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Small profit, I trow, shall be found; strong hands must help our need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou then art minded to yoke the bulls of Aiêtes the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hero Aison’s son, and thine heart is good for the thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up then, and keep thy promise, and gird up thy loins for the toil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if aught thine heart mistrusteth her manhood, and feareth the foil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither goad thyself on, nor yet for another of these look round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou sitt’st in their midst: for one that shall nowise flinch hath been found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even I; for the bitterest pang is but death, to which all men are bound.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake Aiakus’ son; and Telamon’s spirit was stirred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftly in haste he uprose; and Idas uprose for the third</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heart uplifted; and rose the sons of Tyndareus then;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rose with them Oineus’ son, who was numbered among strong men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit not yet so much as the tender down on his chin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Showed; with such hero-might was his spirit uplifted within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the rest unto these gave place, and were still: then spake straightway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Argus to these for the contest that longed, and thus did he say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Friends, haply to this may we come at the last: but ere that be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help for our need shall be found with my mother, it seemeth me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore refrain you a little yet, how eager soe’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And abide in the ship as aforetime: for better it is to forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than reckless-hearted to choose the path to destruction’s lair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the halls of Aiêtes nurtured a certain maiden doth dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Hekatê taught strange cunning in herbs of the witch-wife’s spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even all that on solid land or in fleeting water grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therewith she turneth to balm the fireblast’s fervent glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rivers in mid rush roaring she suddenly causeth to stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And constraineth the stars and the paths of the holy moon with a band.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her we bethought us, the while from the palace we trod the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If haply my mother, seeing that sisters born be they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could persuade this maiden, that so for the contest her help she may lend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if this thing appeareth good in your eyes, of a truth will I wend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the palace-hall of Aiêtes aback this selfsame day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To try her:⁠—a God peradventure will help when I make essay.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and the Gods of their kindness sent forth a sign in their sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a fearful dove from the might of a hawk swift-winging her flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From on high into Jason’s bosom fell in her panic affright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the hawk swooped blindly, and fluttered impaled on the high stern-crest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then on Mopsus a spirit of prophecy came, and he cried to the rest:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Unto you, O friends, by the will of the Gods this token is sent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in none other wise shall ye better interpret the sign’s intent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we seek to the maiden, and woo her with speech of entreaty fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With our uttermost wit; and I ween she will not reject our prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If Phineus foretold that your home-return should be brought to pass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With help of the Cyprian Goddess. Her gentle bird it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That escaped from destruction. As now mine heart doth in vision foresee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As touching this omen, O that so in the end it may be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friends, let us cry to the Queen of Kythera to help our need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway obey ye the counsel of Argus with diligent heed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and the young men praised it, calling to mind the word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phineus the prophet; but Idas alone rose anger-stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouting aloud in his fierceness of wrath, and thus did he say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Out on it!⁠—were women our voyaging-fellows through all that way?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We men that be calling on Kypris now for our help to arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not on the War-god’s mighty strength?⁠—and by turning your eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On doves and on hawks shall ye ’scape from the toil, shall ye win the prize?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away!⁠—let the deeds of war no more in your hearts find place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the cunning in pleading that winneth a weakling maiden’s grace!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even so hot-hearted he spake; and many of them that heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low murmured thereat; howbeit none of them answered a word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sat he down yet scowling in wrath; and rose thereupon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jason to stir them to deeds, and thus spake Aison’s son:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Let Argus be sent from the ship, seeing all commend this thing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But let us which remain from her hiding-place in the river bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And openly moor to the shore our galley; for now gone by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the time for hiding as cravens that cower from the onset-cry.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So did he speak: and he hasted the feet of Argus again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To return to the city with speed, and the hawsers drew they then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the stream inboard at Aison’s son’s command;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a little above the backwater rowed they the galley aland.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Aiêtes assembled for council the Kolchian men in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloof from his halls, in the place where they gathered in days overpast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devising against the Minyans trouble and treachery grim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he purposed, so soon as the bulls should have torn him limb from limb⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This man who had taken upon him the heavy task to fulfil⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hew the oak-grove down that crested the shaggy hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to burn the ship and her crew, that so amid fume and flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They might vent that insolence forth for a king’s defiance that came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and he had not received, he said, even Aiolus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his halls in his sorest need, even Phrixus, the man who outshone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All strangers in courtesy and in fear of the Gods on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that Zeus’ self sent unto him his messenger down from the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Hermes, bidding him give to the stranger the welcoming hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How much less therefore, when pirate-rovers came to his land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should they long ’scape griefs of their own, the caitiffs whose only toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was to stretch forth their hands in the taking of other men’s goods for a spoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to weave dark webs of guile, and on herdmen folk to fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With soul-dismaying shouts, and to harry steading and stall?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and the sons of Phrixus should render to him therebeside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meet penalty, they who had dared in returning thither to guide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felons, consorting with men which were minded to drive even him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light-hearted from honour and sceptre; as spake that prophecy grim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warning whereof he heard from his father the Sun erewhile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bidding him, “See thou beware of thine offspring’s secret guile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the plots of thy seed, and the curse of their crafty iniquity;”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which cause also he sent them, even as they craved, oversea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By their father’s behest, to Achaia a long way:⁠—yet there came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his soul no shadow of fear of his daughters, lest these should frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Treason: no fear of his son Absyrtus his heart had chilled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he said, “In the children of Chalkiopê shall the curse be fulfilled.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bodings of awful revenge on the strangers foamed on his lip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his fury; for loudly he threatened to hale to the flames their ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her crew, that none through the meshes of ruin’s net might slip.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Argus had gone to the halls of Aiêtes the while, and with speech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of manifold pleading now did the prince his mother beseech</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pray to Medea to help them; yea, and herself theretofore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was full of the selfsame thought, but the fear on her soul lay sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest haply fate should withstand, and in vain she should speak her fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her dread of her father’s deadly wrath; or if to her prayer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She should yield, yet all should be brought to light, and her deeds laid bare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the maiden had cast her down on her couch, and slumber deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her anguish relieved her; but straightway dreams came haunting her sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such visions dark and deceitful as trouble the anguish-distraught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it seemed that the stranger had taken upon him the task; but she thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it was not the Fleece of the Ram that he longed to win for a prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet for the sake of this had he fared in any wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Aiêtes’ city, but only to lead her, his wedded wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his home; and she dreamed that herself did wrestle in strife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the bulls, and exceeding lightly the mighty labour she wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit thereafter her parents set their promise at naught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that not to their child, but to him, was the challenge to yoke that team.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore contention of wrangling clashed through her troubled dream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twixt her sire and the strangers: and lo, in her hand the decision they laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the issue should follow her will, and the thoughts of the heart of the maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway the stranger she chose: all reverence thrust she aside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her parents; and measureless anguish seized them, and loud they cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their fury, and sleep forsook her at that heart-thrilling sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all a-quiver with fear she upstarted: she stared all round</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the walls of her chamber; her fluttering spirit back to her breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce drew she: the words like a panic-struck throng through her pale lips pressed:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O wretched I!⁠—how nightmare visions my spirit appal!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I fear me lest awful ills from the heroes’ voyage befall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my heart, my heart for the stranger is tossed in a storm of dismay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him woo some girl in his own Achaia far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be maidenhood mine, and mine in the house of my parents to stay!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet⁠—yet⁠—though mine heart be by love made reckless, the desperate deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will try not unbid by my sister⁠—never!⁠—except she plead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Medea to help in the toil, in her anguish of fear for the sake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her sons: this might peradventure assuage my sore heart-ache.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and she rose from her bed, and she opened her chamber door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barefooted, in vesture of linen alone; and she yearned full sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To go to her sister, and over the threshold stole the maid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet lingering⁠—lingering⁠—long at the door of the chamber she stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held by her shame. Then backward in sudden panic she fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And into her bower she darted, and shrank to the shadows in dread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And backward and forward her purposeless feet ever paced in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whenso she braced her to go, shame fettered her feet with its chain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever as shame plucked back, bold passion spurred her amain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice she essayed, thrice stayed she; but now at the fourth essay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down on her bed on her face did she cast her, and writhing she lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when some bride in her desolate bower for her lord maketh moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto whom her brethren and parents espoused her a little agone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for shame and for thinking on him awhile she cannot face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyes of her handmaids, but silent she sits in a secret place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some doom hath destroyed him, or ever the crown of their desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was attained of these: and there in her chamber, with heart on fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stilly she sitteth and weepeth, beholding her couch left lorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stilly⁠—for fear of the mock of the women, the laugh of their scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like her did Medea make moan: but with sob and with broken cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet she lamented, it chanced one heard as she passed thereby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which had been from a child a handmaid tending her lady’s bower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So she told it to Chalkiopê: now she sat in the selfsame hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her sons, devising to win her sister to help their need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she hearkened the strange tale told of the handmaid with diligent heed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither put it lightly aside; but she hastened in startled dismay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth of her bower and on to the bower where the maiden lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anguish-racked, while her frenzied fingers tore each cheek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her eyes all drowned in tears she beheld, and thus did she speak:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah me, Medea, ah me!⁠—and why art thou weeping so?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What hath befallen?⁠—how came to thine heart this terrible woe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it some disease heaven-sent that hath suddenly smitten thy frame?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or what, hast thou heard some deadly threat from our father that came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touching me and my sons? Would God I had never so much as seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My parents’ home, nor the town, but my dwelling afar had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the ends of the earth, where never was heard the Kolchian name!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake: but Medea’s cheeks flushed crimson; and maiden shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the answer she yearned full sore to render withheld her long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now was the word awake, and fluttered upon her tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And backward anon to her breast it flew like a startled bird.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And often she parted her lovely lips to utter the word;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet fainted her voice on the threshold of speech: but at last of her guile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus spake she⁠—and ever the bold Loves thrust her onward the while:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O Chalkiopê, mine heart for thy sons is disquieted sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest my father destroy them forthright with the men from the alien shore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So ghastly a dream, while a moment I slumbered, but now did I see⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oh may the Gods forefend that the vision accomplished should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbid that thy love for thy sons should be made heart-anguish to thee!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, proving her sister, longing to hear her pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unprompted of her, for her help for her sons in the evil day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong anguish swept o’er the mother’s soul like a surging tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her terror at that she had heard, and with fervent beseeching she cried:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yea, and to this same end did I come with eager speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If with me thou wouldst haply devise and prepare some help for our need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But swear thou by Earth and by Heaven that thou wilt conceal in thine heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatsoever I say unto thee, and wilt bear therein thy part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the Blessèd I pray thee, by thine own soul, by thy parents’ name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou see not my sons in torment destroyed by a doom of shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horribly: else with my dear-loved sons will I die, and come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hateful vengeance-spirit to haunt thee from Hades’ home!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and straightway gushed her tears in torrent flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And around her knees did she fling her arms in a passion of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And adown on her bosom she bowed her head; and there they two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over each other made piteous lament, and the dim halls through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went wailing low the sound of anguished women’s cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to her disquieted sorely Medea made reply:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“God help thee!⁠—what healing can I bring thee?⁠—what talk is thine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of horrible curses and vengeance-spirits!⁠—would God it were mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine by a power firm-stablished, to save thy sons from bane!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be witness⁠—the mighty oath of the Kolchians, the oath thou art fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should swear⁠—be witness the broad-arched Heaven, and the Earth below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother of Gods, that, so far as the bounds of my strength may go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will fail thee not, if thy prayer be a boon that man may bestow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and Chalkiopê made answer to her, and she said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now couldst thou not dare for the stranger⁠—himself too asketh thine aid⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By wile or by wisdom achievement of this emprise to win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sake of my sons? Lo, now is his messenger Argus within,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praying that I would essay to win for them help of thy grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the mid-court left I him when I came to seek thy face.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and bounded within her Medea’s heart for delight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fair skin suddenly crimsoned, and swam before her sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mist, as she flushed and burned; and answer she made thereunto:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Chalkiopê, according to that which is pleasing to you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so will I do. May I see with mine eyes the dawn not again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor mayst thou behold me long in the land of living men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I count aught dearer to me than the lives of thee and thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even thy sons: for verily these be brethren mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My kinsmen belovèd, my childhood-playmates: myself I call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine own, own sister, my sister’s own little daughter withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since even as them the baby me to thy breast didst thou hold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So still have I heard the tale by the lips of my mother told.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But go thou, in silence bury this my kindness, that so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may work out unwares to my parents my promise. At dawn will I go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Hekatê’s fane, to bear thither the drugs that shall cast a spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the bulls for the stranger for whose sake all this strife befell.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So the mother returned from the chamber, and spake to her sons full fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her sister’s help. But now did the tide of shame again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of terrible fear o’er the soul of Medea in solitude rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she in her sire’s despite for a man such deeds should devise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then night drew darkness over the earth; on the lonely sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sailors gazed from their ships on the Bear and the flashing three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Orion; and came upon every wayfarer longing for sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on each gate-warder; and mothers, that daylong wont to weep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For children dead, with the peace of slumber were folded around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No barking of dogs through the city there was any more, no sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of voices, but all the blackening gloom was with silence bound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not o’er Medea did sleep sweet dews of forgetfulness shake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many a care in her yearning for Jason held her awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adread of the mighty strength of the bulls, ’neath the fury of whom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must die in the War-god’s acre, must die by a shameful doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with thick fast throbbings struggled the heart in her breast alway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when on the wall of a dwelling the leaping sunbeams play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flung up from the water that into a caldron but now fell plashing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or into a pail, and hither and thither the sunbeam flashing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lightning eddy and flicker is dancing in mad unrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So quivered and fluttered the heart within the maiden’s breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tears from her eyes were flowing for ruth, and through all her frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a smouldering fire her anguish burned, and coiled its flame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round every fine-strung nerve, and thrilled to her beating brain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where sharpest of all the pang strikes in, when the shafts of pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are shot to the heart by the Loves that rest them never from harm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now did she say that the drugs she would give that should bind with a charm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bulls, and now would she not, but with him would she cease to live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift changed her mood: she would not die, she, nor the drugs would she give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in silence endure her fate, the curse that was doomed to betide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, there as she sat, she wavered this way and that, and she cried:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh hapless I, whether this way or that into ruin I fall!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On every hand is despair for my soul: no help is at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From woe, but it burneth, a furnace unquenchèd!⁠—would God it had been</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine to be slain ere this by the shafts of the Huntress-queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ever I saw him, or came to Achaia-land the sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Chalkiopê, whom a God, or the awful Avenging Ones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither, for sorrow to us, and for many a tear, have led!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>—Let him perish amidst of the struggle, if this be his weird, to be sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fallows of doom!⁠—for how shall I ’scape my parents’ ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the drugs I prepare? With what manner of words shall I blind them then?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wile, what cunning device for mine hero’s help shall I find?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I see him apart from his friends, shall I meet him with greeting kind?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O ill-starred!⁠—though he should die, yet cannot I hope that so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assuaging should come of my pain: nay, this should be but for my woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he of his life were bereft⁠—oh, get thee behind me, shame!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty, avaunt!⁠—So scatheless by mine endeavour he came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of peril, then might he fare wheresoever seemeth him best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for me⁠—on the selfsame day when triumphant he bideth the test,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then let me die, from the rafters straining my neck in the noose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or tasting of poisons that rend the soul from the body loose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, but after my dying!⁠—what scoffs and what mocks will they fling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On my grave!⁠—and far and near how every city will ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the tale of my doom; and from lip to lip shall be tossed the jeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a mock shall I be in the mouths of the daughters of Kolchis that sneer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Lo, she that so lovingly cared for a man of an alien race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she died!⁠—lo, she that on home and on parents heaped disgrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Giving reins to her lust!’ What shame should not be loaded on me?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah me, my infatuate folly!⁠—better by far should it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this same night to forsake my life these chambers within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a fate of mystery, ’scaping from slander’s fiendish din,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ever that hideous befouling, that nameless defilement, I win!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and she rose, and a casket she brought, wherein there lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many a drug, some helpful to heal, some mighty to slay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her knees she laid it, and brake into weeping: her bosom-fold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was wet with her tears; from the wounds unstanched of her heart they rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she bitterly wailed for her fate: and her soul was exceeding fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To choose her a murderous drug, and to taste oblivion of pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the eager fingers now of the hapless maid ’gan part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bands of the casket, to take it forth⁠—but, with sudden start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With an awful fear of Hades the hateful shuddered her heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long spellbound sat she in speechless horror: around her thronged</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visions of all sweet things for the which through life she had longed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She thought of the hours delightsome the lot of the living that fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she thought of her merry playmates, even as a maiden will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sweeter than ever was grown the sun unto her to behold⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No marvel, seeing she yearned for all so passionate-souled!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So she put from her knees the casket, and laid it down again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All changed by the promptings of Hêrê: no more did she waver then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her purpose; but now did she long for the dawning with speed to awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the dayspring to rise, that so to her hero the drugs she might take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the spell, as her covenant pledged her, and meet him face to face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a time she unbarred the doors of her chamber, to gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth for the far faint gleam, and welcome flashed upon her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Child of the Mist, and throughout the city the folk ’gan stir.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Argus spake to his brethren, bidding them there to abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To learn the mind of the maiden, and how should her purpose betide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But himself turned backward again, and unto the galley he hied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now soon as the maiden beheld the splendour of dawn outrolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the heavens, gathered she up with her hands her tresses of gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which over her shoulders in careless disarray hung loose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she bathed her feverish cheeks, and with perfume shed from the cruse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All nectar-scented her body shone; and a robe fair-wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She donned, and with brooches cunningly-fashioned its folds upcaught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cloud of a veil did she cast o’er her head unearthly fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as silver it shimmered: she trode the floors of the palace there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pacing unfaltering to and fro, forgetful of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those heaven-sent woes at the door, and of others that yet should befall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she summoned her bower-maidens; twelve by tale were they:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the night at the entering-in of her odorous chamber they lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young as herself, nor yet on the bridal couch embraced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these she commanded to harness the mules to the wain in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear their lady to Hekatê’s passing-beautiful fane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore the bower-maidens hasted and harnessed the mules to the wain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Medea the while took forth from the casket a drug of might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The magic root that they say is the Herb of Prometheus hight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if any with midnight sacrifice upon Daira shall call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only-begotten, and smear his body therewithal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No stroke of brazen weapon shall wound the flesh of him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, nor from blazing fire shall he flinch; but his strength of limb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his prowess throughout that day shall all their might confound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First-born it upshot from the clod in the hour when dropped to the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the ravening eagle’s beak, where the crags of Caucasus frowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ichor, the blood of a God, of Prometheus in torments bound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the flower of it blossomed a cubit the face of the earth above:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the glow of the crocus Corycian, so was the hue thereof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upborne upon pale stalks twain, and below in its earthy bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The root thereof as flesh new-severed was crimson-red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blood thereof, like a mountain-oak’s dark sap, in a shell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Caspian strand she gathered, to weave thereof a spell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When seven times she had bathed her in waters unresting that glide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seven times upon Brimo the Nursing-mother had cried⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night-wandering Brimo, the Underworld Goddess, the Queen of the dead⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in dusky vesture clad through the blackness of night did she tread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dark earth shuddered and quaked deep down with muttering moan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the Titan root was severed; yea, and Iapetus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In frenzy of heart-wringing agony groaned a fearful groan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, from the casket ta’en, in her odorous girdle she laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The girdle enclasping the waist divinely sweet of the maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then forth of the portal she paced, and she set her foot on the wain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beside her went upon either hand bower-maidens twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her left hand gave they the reins, and the fair-fashioned whip hath she ta’en</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her right; and adown through the city she drave; and the rest of the train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her handmaids laid their hands on the wain, behind it to run</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adown the highway broad, for their tunics delicate-spun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each maiden had kilted up above her ivory knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas as when, where Parthenius’ soft-flowing ripples slide through the lea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as when, coming up from her bath in Amnisus’ crystalline water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-borne on her golden chariot rideth Latona’s Daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driving betwixt the hills the fleetfoot roes of her car,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To greet the sacrifice-steam of a hecatomb afar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Nymphs in throngs upon throngs attend her, gathering some</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the green well-head of Amnisus’ self, and others that come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the glens and the fountain-flashing heights; and fawn and whine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cowering beasts, as onward cometh the presence divine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So through the city they sped, and to this side and that of the street</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people made way, neither dared they the eyes of the princess to meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when she had left behind her the city’s fair-paved ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was now drawn nigh, as she drave through the plain, to the holy place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from the smooth-running wain she stept to the earth straightway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste; and unto her maidens thus did Medea say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, I have verily grievously sinned, for I took no thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have nought to do with the strangers whose wandering feet have sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our land:⁠—lo now, with amazement’s perplexity smitten sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is all the city, that none of the women, which heretofore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hitherward have assembled day by day, be now gathered here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But seeing that we be come, and that none beside draweth near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come then, with delightsome song without stint or stay let us sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To our soul’s satisfying, and pluck we the lovely flowers that spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the tender grass; and in this same hour on the homeward way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will we wend. Ye also with many a gift shall return this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward, if now with mine heart’s desire ye will gladden me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the pleading of Argus prevaileth with me, and of Chalkiopê:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hide in your hearts that ye hear from me; let your lips be dumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest to my father’s ears peradventure the story should come:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They beseech me to take rich gifts, and to save in his emprise fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yon stranger who took it upon him the might of the bulls to quell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and their counsel was good in mine eyes, that I bade him appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my presence this day, alone, with none of his comrades near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we may divide those presents amongst us, if haply he bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gifts in his hand, and may give him a spell-drug, a balefuller thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the strength of the bulls. But stand ye aloof when he draweth anigh.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So spake she, and pleased them all her counsel of subtlety.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now Argus apart from his comrades had sundered Aison’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So soon as he heard from his brethren how that Medea had gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth in the misty dawning to fare unto Hekatê’s fane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over the plain did he lead him, and Mopsus companioned the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ampykus’ son, most wise to interpret the tokens aright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the coming of birds, and the signs to discern of their parting flight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Never yet had there been such a man in the days of the men of old⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor of them of the lineage of Zeus, nor the champions hero-souled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which sprang from the blood of the rest of the Gods that endure for aye⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a man as the bride of Zeus made Jason to be that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In glory of bodily presence, in witchery of his tongue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever his comrades gazing upon him in wonderment hung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his radiance of manifold grace: and glad for the way they should wend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waxed Ampykus’ son, as foreboding, I trow, how all should end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now there is by the path through the plain, as ye draw to the temple anigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poplar that waveth his tresses of countless leaves on high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereon had the crows ever-babbling pitched as it were their tent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereof one, clapping her pinions, beneath her as these twain went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The counsel of Hêrê chanted, mid high boughs swayed to and fro:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo there, what a pitiful seer!⁠—even that which the children know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wit can in no wise conceive, how that no word sweet and dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maiden will murmur to man, while strangers be loitering near!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Avaunt, vile prophet and witless!⁠—on thee not the Cyprian Queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thee not the gentle Loves of their kindness are breathing, I ween!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So ceased the voice of her chiding, and Mopsus smiled to hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heaven-sent cry of the bird, and spake to the heroes the seer:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now pass thou on to the Goddess’s temple: therein shalt thou find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The maiden, O Aison’s son: thou shalt prove her passing kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the promptings of Kypris, who also thine helper shall be in thy toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as prophesied Phineus, Agênor’s son, erewhile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we twain, Argus and I, thy coming again will abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aloof, yea, in this same place: but thou, with none beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wise words plead with the maiden, and win her thy will to do.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in his wisdom he spake, and the others consented thereto.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Medea⁠—her thoughts unto nought else turned, upon nought could be stayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howsoever she sang⁠—but never a song, howsoe’er she essayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleased her, that long its melody winged her feet for the dance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ever she faltered amidst them, her eyes ever wandered askance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away from the throng of her maidens unresting; and over the ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning aside her cheeks, far off ever strained she her gaze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O the heart in her breast oft fainted, whenever in fancy she heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleet past her the sound of a footfall, the breath of a breeze as it stirred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it was not long ere the hero appeared to her yearning eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stately striding, as out of the ocean doth Sirius uprise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who climbeth the sky most glorious and clear to discern from afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But unto the flocks for measureless mischief a baleful star:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so came Aison’s son to the maiden glorious to see⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with Jason’s appearing dawned on her troublous misery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then it seemed as her heart dropped out of her bosom; a dark mist came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over her eyes, and hot in her cheeks did the blushes flame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor backward nor forward a step could she stir: all strength was gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her knees; and her feet to the earth seemed rooted; and one after one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her handmaidens all drew back, and with him was she left alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So these twain stood⁠—all stirless and wordless stood face to face:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As oaks they seemed, or as pines upsoaring in stately grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which side by side all still mid the mountains rooted stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When winds are hushed; but by breath of the breeze when at last they are fanned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stir they with multitudinous murmur and sigh⁠—so they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By love’s breath stirred were to pour out all in their hearts that lay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Aison’s son beheld how the maiden’s soul was adread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wilderment heaven-sent, and kindly-courteous he said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wherefore, O maiden, dost fear me so sorely, alone as I am?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never was I as the loud-tongued blusterers, void of shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, not when aforetime I dwelt in my fatherland oversea:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore be thou not, maiden, over-abashed before me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shouldst not inquire whatsoever thou wilt, or utter thy mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, seeing we twain be met with friendly hearts and kind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a place where sin is of heaven accurst, in a hallowed spot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak thou, and question withal as thou wilt: but beguile me not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pleasant words, forasmuch as thou gavest thy promise erewhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy sister, to give me the charm that I long for, the herbs of guile.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I beseech thee in Hekatê’s name⁠—for the sake of thy parents I pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of Zeus, that o’er stranger and suppliant stretcheth his hand alway!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, a suppliant am I, a stranger withal, which am come to thee here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sore straits bending the knee; for in this my task of fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I nowise prevail, except I be holpen of thine and thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to thee will I render requital of thanks in the days to be⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As is meet and right for them in a far-away land which dwell⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making glorious thy name and thy fame, and mine hero-companions shall tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The story of thy renown, when to Hellas again they have won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and the heroes’ wives and mothers, who now make moan</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us, I ween, on the strand as they sit by the sighing brine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to scatter in air their bitter affliction is thine⁠—is thine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not I were the first⁠—was Theseus not saved from the ordeal grim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Minos’ child for her kindness’ sake which she bare unto him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ariadne, born of the Sun-god’s daughter Pasiphaê?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she, when slumbered the wrath of Minos, over the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sailed with the hero, forsaking her land. The Immortals divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loved well that maid: in the midst of the firmament set is her sign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crown of stars, which they name Ariadne’s diadem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All night circling amidst of the signs that the heavens begem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou also shalt have of the Gods like thanks, if thou shalt redeem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From destruction so goodly a host of heroes⁠—ah, needs must it seem</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That through form so lovely as thine should the beauty of kindness beam!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Extolling her so spake he; and her eyelids drooped, while played</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nectar-smile on her lips; and melted the heart of the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his praising uplifted: her eyes are a moment upraised to his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all speech faileth: no word at the first to her lips may rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in one breath yearned she to speak forth all her joy and her pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with hand ungrudging forth from her odorous zone hath she ta’en</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charm, and he straightway received it into his hands full fain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, now would she even have drawn forth all her soul from her breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had laid it with joy in his hands for her gift, had he made request,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wondrously now from the golden head of Aison’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did Love out-lighten the witchery-flame; and her sweet eyes shone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the gleam that he stole therefrom, and her heart glowed through and through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melting for rapture away, from the lips of the rose as the dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the sun’s kiss melteth away, when the dayspring is kindled anew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these twain now on the earth were fixing their eyes abashed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anon yet again their glances each on the other they flashed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As with radiant eyelids they smiled a heart-beguiling smile:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bespake him the maiden at last, yet scarce after all this while:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Give thou heed now, that my counsel may haply be for thine aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time at thy coming my father within thine hands shall have laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crop of the serpent’s jaws for thy sowing, the teeth of bane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shalt thou watch for the hour when the night is sundered in twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then thou, when first in the river’s tireless flow thou hast bathed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, with none other beside thee, in night-hued vesture swathed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt dig thee a rounded pit, and over the dark earth-bowl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt thou slaughter a ewe, and shalt burn the unsevered carcase whole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a pyre, the which on the very brink of the pit thou hast piled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And propitiate only-begotten Hekatê, Perseus’ child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of a chalice pouring the hive-stored toil of the bee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when thou hast sought the grace of the Goddess heedfully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turn thee to pass from the pyre, and beware lest any sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or of footfalls behind thee startle thee, so that thou turn thee round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or of baying of hounds, lest all that is wrought be undone thereby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thyself to thine hero-companions never again draw nigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in water at dawn shalt thou steep this herb, and thy limbs shalt thou bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as with oil shalt anoint thee therewith; and prowess there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt thou find, and strength exceeding great: thou wouldst nowise say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with men thou couldst match thee in might, but with Gods that abide for aye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therewithal be thy lance and thy buckler besprent with the magic dew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy sword: then shall not the spear-heads prevail to pierce thee through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Earth-born men, nor the fiery breath of the bulls of bane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unendurably darting. Yet no long time shalt thou thus remain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only for that same day: notwithstanding flinch not thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the toil; and another thing yet for thine help will I tell to thee now:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So soon as the mighty bulls thou hast yoked, and by manifold toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by strength of thine hands hast sped the share through the stubborn soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And adown the furrows the bristling harvest of giants shall stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where fell on the dusky clods the serpent’s teeth from thine hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as thou mark’st them in throngs through the fallows upbursting to day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast thou in their midst unawares a massy stone: and they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ravening hounds o’er a gobbet of flesh that wrangle, shall slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one his fellow: thou also in battle-fury shalt fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rout. So the Golden Fleece unto Hellas, if this be all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Aia afar shalt thou bear:⁠—O yea, turn thou and depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whithersoever it pleaseth thee: seek the desire of thine heart!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and her eyes to the earth at her feet in silence she cast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her cheeks divinely fair were wet as her tears fell fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she sorrowed because that far and afar from her side o’er the main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must wander away. And she looked in his eyes, and she spake yet again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mournful word, and his right hand now hath she ta’en in her own;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the shamefastness now from her eyes on the wings of love had flown:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But O remember, if ever thou com’st to thine home afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Medea’s name: and in like wise I, when sundered we are,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will forget thee not. But tell, of thy good will, where is thine home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whitherward bound thou wilt fare in thy galley over the foam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is it unto Orchomenus’ wealthy burg that thy feet shall go?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or anigh to Aiaia’s isle? Of the maiden fain would I know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some maiden far-renowned, whom thou namedst the daughter, I wis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pasiphaê: kinswoman unto my sire that lady is.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So did she speak; and over him stole, as the maiden wept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love the victorious; and answering speech to his lips hath leapt:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yea, verily, never by night, I ween, and by day nevermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shalt thou be forgotten of me, if unto Achaia’s shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unscathed I shall ’scape indeed, and Aiêtes before me set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mine hands to achieve, none other toil more desperate yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if this hath pleased thee, to learn what land I call mine own,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will tell thee⁠—yea, and mine own heart biddeth me make it known</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A country there is⁠—steep mountain-ramparts around it run⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A land of streams and of pastures, wherein Iapetus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Prometheus, begat the valiant Deukalion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who of all men was first that builded a city, or reared a fane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Deathless, and first was he of the kings over men that reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That land do the folk that around it dwell Haimonia call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therein is my city Iolkos found: therein withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand many beside, where not so much have they heard as the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aiaia’s isle: but rumour hath told how Minyas came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereout, even Minyas Aiolus’ son, and builded the town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Orchomenus; over the marches Kadmeian her towers look down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet why should I speak things vain as the wild winds’ empty sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our home, of the daughter of Minos, the princess far-renowned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ariadne⁠—the glorious name whereby that heart’s desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was called among men, the maiden of whom thou dost inquire?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would God that, even as Minos his heart unto Theseus inclined</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her sake, so would thy father with me be in friendship joined!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, with tender words and caressing the maiden to woo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But anguish exceeding bitter was thrilling the heart of her through:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in sorrow of spirit with vehement words she made reply:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O haply in Hellas ’tis good to be heedful of friendship’s tie:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Aiêtes is not such a man among men as thou saidst but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was Minos, Pasiphaê’s lord; and with Ariadne, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May I nowise compare me: wherefore of guest-love speak not thou.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only remember thou me, when safe thou hast sped thy flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Iolkos; and I will remember⁠—yea, in my parents’ despite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will remember thee: and from far may a rumour come unto me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a messenger-bird with the tidings, when I am forgotten of thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or me, even me, may the swift-winged blasts from the earth’s breast tear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And away hence over the sea to the land of Iolkos bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so I might cast reproaches on thee, yea, unto thy face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And remind thee that all by mine help thou escapedst⁠—but oh that my place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day were of right in thine halls, the place of a queen at the board!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and down her cheeks the piteous tears aye poured.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he caught up her words even there, and with comforting speech did he say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O stricken one, leave thou the empty blasts at their will to stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the messenger-bird to roam, for thy words are but vanity!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if ever thou come unto those abodes, if Hellas thou see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honour and worship of men and of women then shall be thine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, they shall reverence thee as a very presence divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because that again to their homes did the sons of the Hellenes win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thy devising, yea, and the brethren of these, and their kin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a stalwart husband of thee hath received his life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shalt thou enter the bridal bower with me⁠—my wife;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing shall come between our love, and nothing shall sunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till death’s shroud fold us around, and our hearts are chilled thereunder.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and to hear him her soul was melted within her then:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet she shuddered to see the deeds whose end was beyond her ken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah hapless!⁠—not long was she doomed to refuse a home in the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hellas, for hereunto was she guided of Hêrê’s hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the end that for Pelias’ bane Aiaian Medea might come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Iolkos the hallowed, forsaking her fatherland-home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But by this from afar were the handmaids glancing towards these twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full oft in disquiet; for need was now, as the day ’gan wane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the maiden unto her mother should turn her homeward again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she thought not yet of departing, such joy did her spirit take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alike in his goodlihead, and the winsome words that he spake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Aison’s son took heed, and late and at last did he say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo now, it is time to depart, lest the sun’s light fade away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before we be ware, and lest some stranger should haply espy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this. Yet again will we meet, coming hitherward, thou and I.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So in sweetest communion did these try each the other’s heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus far; and thereafter they sundered. And now did Jason depart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his friends and the ship, while his heart for joy beat high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she to her handmaids, and all in a troop did these draw nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet her: she marked them not, as unto her side they drew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her soul to the clouds had soared far up ’twixt earth and the blue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with feet that moved in a dream she mounted the fleet-running wain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her left hand grasped she the reins, in her right the whip hath she ta’en</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curious-fashioned, to drive the mules; and fast did they flee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As on to the city they sped and the palace; and Chalkiopê</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Gan ask her of all that befell, for her sons’ sake anguish-stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rapt in a trance of thoughts back-drifting she heard not a word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to all that eager questioning never a word she said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But adown on a lowly stool did she sit at the foot of the bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her left hand propping her cheek as she wearily drooped aside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with tears were her eyes brimming over, as surged the dark chill tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of remembrance of emprise dread that the covenant bound her to bide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when Aison’s son had wended aback to the place where stayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades, what time he had left them in faring to meet the maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, telling them all the story the while, with these did he hie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the throng of the heroes; and now to the galley drew they anigh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they saw him, and lovingly greeted, and asked him of all that befell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he in the midst of them all did the maiden’s counsels tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he showed them the dread spell-drug. One only of all sat apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idas, nursing his wrath: but the others with joyful heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned them, when darkness fell, their hands from their labour to stay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in great peace laid them down to their rest: but with dawning day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Aiêtes, to ask for the seed of the serpent, sent they away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two men; and foremost Telamon Arês-beloved they sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Aithalides, glorious scion of Hermes, beside him went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So went they, and not for nought, for to these at their coming were given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aiêtes the king the teeth for the grim strife hard to be striven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The teeth of the dragon Aonian, that, seeking the wide world through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Europa, Kadmus found in Ogygian Thêbê, and slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The monster that lurked, a warder, beside the Aretian spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There also he dwelt, by the heifer led, which Apollo the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the word of prophecy gave for his guide, that he should not stray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These teeth did Tritonis the Goddess tear from its jawbone away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the gift on Aiêtes and him that had slain the beast she bestowed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the plain Aonian Kadmus the teeth of the serpent sowed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And an earth-born nation was founded there of Agênor’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The remnant left when the harvest of Arês’ spear was done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the teeth to bear to the galley Aiêtes gave full fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he weened that to win to the goal of his task he should strive in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, though to the yoking of those dread bulls he should haply attain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the sun down under the dark earth far away in the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the uttermost hills of the Aethiops, sank to his rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Night was laying her yoke on the necks of her steeds. Then spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shore by the hawsers of Argo the heroes each his bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Jason, so soon as the flashing stars of the circling Bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had set, and under the firmament hushed was all the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the wilderness even as a thief all stealthily hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whatso was needful; for all had he taken thought to provide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the day: and fared with him Argus, and milk from the flock he bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a ewe therewithal; for these had he ta’en from the galley’s store.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when he beheld the place, which was far aloof from the tread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, where under the unscreened sky the clear meads spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There first of all in the flow of the sacred river he bathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His limbs full reverently, and all his body he swathed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a dark-hued cloak, which Hypsipylê, daughter of Lemnos’ race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave him aforetime, memorial of many a loving embrace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter he digged him a pit in the plain of a cubit wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the billets he heaped, and the lamb’s throat cut by the dark pit’s side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the carcase he stretched on the pile, and he thrust thereunder the fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kindled the brands, and mingled libations he poured on the pyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling on Hekatê Brimo to draw for his helper nigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when he had called on her, backward he fared, and she hearkened his cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of nethermost caverns of darkness the Awful Queen drew near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Aisonid’s sacrifice, and about her did shapes of fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even serpents, in horrible wreaths and knots, mid the oak-boughs hang:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flashed a fitful splendour of torches unnumbered; and rang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around her wild and high the baying of hounds of hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the meadow-land trembled under her tread; and the yell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pealed of the marish-haunting Nymphs of the river, that dance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the pastures wherethrough Amaryntian Phasis’ ripples glance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And terror gat hold upon Aison’s son; but, for all his dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet he turned him not round as his feet thence bore him, until he had sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to his friends: and by this over Caucasus’ snow-flecked height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she rose, was the Dawn mist-cradled shooting her shafts of light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now did Aiêtes array in the corslet of stubborn mould</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breast, the corslet that Arês gave, in the day when rolled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mimas of Phlegra beneath his hands in the dust of doom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he set on his head the golden helmet of fourfold plume</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flaming like to the world-encompassing sun’s red gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When first in the dawning he leapeth up from the Ocean-stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He uplifted his manifold-plated shield, and he grasped in his hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His terrible spear and resistless: was none that before it might stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the rest of the heroes, since Herakles now they had left afar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He only against it had matched his might in the shock of war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his fair-fashioned chariot of fleet-footed steeds was stayed for the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Phaethon hard by; then to the chariot-floor did he spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he drew through his fingers the reins, and forth of the city-gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove he along the broad highway, by the lists of fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand; and a countless multitude hastened forth at his side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when to the Isthmian athlete-strife Poseidon doth ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-borne on his car, or Tainarus-wards, or to Lerna’s mere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Hyantian Onchestus, the temple-grove that the nations revere;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when to Kalaurea oft-times his chariot-wheels have rolled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Haimonia’s rock, and Geraistus’ town that the forests enfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so was Aiêtes, lord of the Kolchian folk, to behold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Jason the while, obeying the rede from Medea that came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In water hath steeped that drug; and he sprinkled his shield with the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his sturdy spear and his sword; and his comrades with might and main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made proof of his harness, thronging around: yet essayed they in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bend that spear, though it were but a little; but evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unyielding and stark it abode in their strong hands, even as before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Idas, Aphareus’ son⁠—for with wrath was the heart of him black⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his great sword hewed at the shaft by the butt; but the blade leapt back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As hammer from anvil, jarred by the shock; and a mighty shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the heroes rejoicing in hope of the trial’s end rang out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter his own limbs Jason sprinkled; and lo, he was filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With terrible prowess, unspeakable, aweless; the hands of him thrilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tingling with strength, as waxed their sinews with gathering might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as when a battle-steed afire for the fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leapeth and neigheth and paweth the ground, and glorying rears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His neck like a stormy-crested billow, and pricketh his ears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so in the pride of his prowess triumphant was Aison’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hither and thither on high he bounded now and anon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his hands uptossing his brazen shield and his spear’s tough ash.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hadst said that adown through the murky welkin the leaping flash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the tempest-levin was gleaming and flickering once and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the clouds that are bringing hard after their burden of blackest rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor long time now would they tarry from faring forth to essay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The emprise, but row after row upon Argo’s thwarts sat they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And onward exceeding swiftly to Arês’ plain they sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overagainst the city so far before them it spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the space from the start to the turning-post that the car must win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time, when a king unto Hades hath passed, his princely kin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hero and horse ordain the strife of the funeral game.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There found they Aiêtes, and other the tribes of the Kolchian name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The folk on the cliffs Caucasian in lines far-stretching arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the king by the winding brink of the river their coming stayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Aison’s son, when his comrades had made the hawsers fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with his spear and his shield to the mighty trial passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bounding from Argo forth; and there was he bearing with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gleaming helm with the dragon’s sharp teeth filled to the brim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his brand on his shoulders slung, bare-limbed, and in some wise seeming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Arês, in some wise Apollo the lord of the sword gold-gleaming.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the fallow he glanced, and the brazen yoke of the bulls he espied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the plough, hewn solid of massy adamant, therebeside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he strode thereunto, and beside it his strong spear planted upright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the butt-spike thereof, and leaning against it the morion he pight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then tracing the countless tracks of the bulls right on did he fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With nought but his shield: but suddenly forth from an unseen lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a den in the bowels of the earth, wherein was their grimly stall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereover the lurid-gleaming smoke ever hung as a pall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth rushed they together as one, outbreathing the splendour of flame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the heroes quaked when they saw. But Jason, as onward they came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set wide his feet; and even as a rock in the sea doth abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The charging surges whereon the scourging storm-blasts ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him he held to withstand them his shield; and the terrible twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their strong horns bellowing dashed against it with might and main:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevertheless by their onset they stirred him never a jot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as when the armourers’ bellows of stout hide wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the piercèd melting-pot anon with murmur and sigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindle the ravening flame, and anon doth the breath of them die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And an awful roar goeth up therefrom as the flames leap higher</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From beneath, even so these twain outbreathing the rushing fire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roared from their mouths, and about him as lightning leapt and played</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The devouring blaze: yet warded him ever the spells of the maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then grasped he the tip of the horn of the right-hand monster, and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mightily haled with his uttermost strength, till he bowed it low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the brazen yoke, and, striking its hoof of brass with his foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly cast it adown on its knees, and its fellow brute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as it charged him, with one thrust down on its knees did he throw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then his broad shield cast he away on the ground, and, to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this side and that side striding, he kept them fall’n in their place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On their fore-knees, swiftly moving athwart the fervent blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While marvelled the king at the hero’s might. Then drew nigh two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Tyndareus’ sons⁠—for that thus long since had he bidden them do;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they lifted and gave him the yoke on the necks of the bulls to be bound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deftly thereon did he bind it, and ’twixt them upraised from the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brazen pole, and he made it fast by its pointed tip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the yoke: and they twain back from the fire to the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withdrew. Then he caught up again, and cast on his shoulders his shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind him; the helmet strong with the serpent’s sharp teeth filled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He grasped, and his spear resistless, wherewith, as a ploughman wight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pricketh his oxen with goad Pelasgian, so did he smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flanks of the monsters, and starkly and steadily still did he hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unswerving the plough-heft cunningly fashioned of adamant mould.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the bulls were raging the while with fury exceeding sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outbreathing the ravening splendour of fire: as that mad roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the buffeting winds was the blast of their breath, when the seafarers quail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At their yelling above all else, and furl the straining sail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet it was not long ere the beasts, as the stern spear bade them to toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved on, and behind them was broken the fallow’s rugged soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cloven apart by the might of the bulls and the ploughman strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And terribly crashed and groaned, the ploughshare’s furrows along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clods uprent, of a man’s load each, and with sturdy stride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trampling the path the hero followed, and aye flung wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The teeth of the serpent over the clods upheaved by the share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever heedfully turning his head, lest haply, or e’er he was ware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The harvest fell of the Earth-born against him should rise: and with strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brazen hoofs on laboured the while that fearsome twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it was so, that when the third part now was left of the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dawn as it waned, when the toil-forwearied labourers pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O come to us, sweet unyoking-tide! O tarry thou not!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then by the stalwart ploughman the fallowfield’s earing was wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all it was ploughgates four; and the bulls from the yoke loosed he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with shouting and smiting he scared them over the plain to flee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then back toward Argo he hied him again, while yet all clear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Earth-born brood the furrows he saw; and with cheer on cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades hailed him and heartened. He plunged the brazen gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his helm mid the river’s waters, and slaked his thirst from the stream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then bent he his knees till supple they grew; and he filled with might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His great heart, battle-aflame as a boar, when he whetteth for fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the hunters his tushes, and drippeth the plenteous froth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from his jaws to the ground, as he churneth their foam in his wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now by this was the harvest of Earth-born men over all that field</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upspringing; and all round bristled with thronging shield on shield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with battle-spears twy-pointed, and morions glorious-gleaming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The garth of the death-dealing War-god: the splendour thereof upstreaming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the welkin lightened, and up to the heaven of heavens did it go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when on the face of the earth hath fallen abundant snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wind-blasts chase the wintry clouds in scattered rout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the mirk of the night, and all the hosts shine out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the stars through the darkness glittering; so those Earth-born men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashed, o’er the face of the ground upgrowing: but Jason then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembered the rede that Medea the cunning-hearted spake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a huge round boulder up from the earth in his grasp did he take⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A terrible quoit for Arês the War-god: there should not be found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four stalwart men of strength to upraise it a span from the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This caught he up in his hand, and afar with a leap did he throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into their midst, and behind his buckler himself crouched low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Awelessly. Loudly the Kolchians shouted⁠—it rang as the roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the shouting sea when his surges over the sharp reefs pour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But speechless amazement seized on Aiêtes at that vast sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the massy crag: and the Earth-born as fleetfoot hounds ’gan leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each on his fellow, and yelling they slew: the embattled lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On their mother the earth, by their own spears slain, were falling, as pines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or as oaks which the down-rushing blasts of the tempest have scourged and riven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as leapeth a fiery star from the depths of the heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trailing behind him a splendour, a marvel to men which mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How he darteth in shattering glories athwart the firmament’s dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so seemed Aison’s son on the Earth-born rushing: he bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sword from the scabbard outflashed; and here he smote them and there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mowing them down: full many on belly or flank did he smite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which had won to the air waist-high, and some which had risen to light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But shoulder-high, and some as they stood but now upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other some, even as their feet ’gan strain in the onset of fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like as, when round the marches the war upstarteth from sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A husbandman, fearing lest foemen the toil of his hands may reap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Graspeth a curvèd sickle newly-whetted in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And moweth in haste the crop yet green, neither letteth it stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until it be parched in the season due by the shafts of the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so of the Earth-born the harvest he reaped; and with blood did they run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those furrows, as hurrying runnels that brim from a fountain’s plashing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast fell they, some on their faces, bowing their knees, and gnashing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their teeth on the rough clods⁠—this one stayed on his palm, and he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his side: as they wallowed they seemed as the monster-brood of the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many, or ever their feet from beneath the earth had come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierced through, from the height whereunto they had risen, even therefrom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down-drooping, were resting their death-dewed brows on the earth again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so, I ween, when Zeus down-poureth the measureless rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Droop orchard-shoots new-planted, till low on the earth they lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snapped hard by the roots, that the gardener’s toil is doubled thereby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there come on the heart of the lord of the vineyard, which planted the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confusion of face and deadly anguish in such wise came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Aiêtes the king vexation of spirit and heaviness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And back to the city he wended amidst of the Kolchian press,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark-plotting to bring the heroes’ purpose with speed to nought.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the daylight died, and Jason’s mighty achievement was wrought.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
