<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>First in my song shalt thou be, O Phoebus, the song that I sing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the heroes of old, who sped, at the hest of Pelias the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When down through the gorge of the Pontus-sea, through the Crags Dark-blue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Quest of the Fleece of Gold the strong-ribbed Argo flew.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For an oracle came unto Pelias, how that in days to be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A terrible doom should be dealt him of him whom his eyes should see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the field coming in, with the one foot only sandal-shod.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor long thereafter did Jason fulfil the word of the God:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in wading the rush of Amaurus swollen with wintertide rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One sandal plucked he forth of the mire, but the one was he fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leave in the depths, for the swirl of the waters to sweep to the main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway to the presence of Pelias he came, and his hap was to light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a banquet, the which unto Father Poseidon the king had dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rest of the Gods, but Pelasgian Hêrê he heeded not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the king beheld him, and straightway laid for his life the plot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And devised for him toil of a troublous voyage, that lost in the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or lost amid alien men his home-return might be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of the ship and her fashioning, bards of the olden time have told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How Argus wrought, how Athênê made him cunning-souled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now be it mine the lineage and names of her heroes to say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to tell of the long sea-paths whereover they needs must stray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the deeds that they wrought:⁠—may the Muses vouchsafe to inspire the lay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Of Orpheus first will I sing, of the child that Calliopê bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As telleth the tale, for she loved Oeagrus, Thracia’s heir.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the peak Pimplean was born the Song-queen’s wondrous child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they tell how he charmed by the voice of his song on the mountains wild</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stubborn rocks into life, made rivers their flowing refrain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wildwood oaks this day be memorials of that weird strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they burgeon and bloom by Zonê yet on the Thracian shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ranked orderly line upon line, the selfsame trees which of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spell-drawn by his lyre, from Pieria followed the minstrel on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such an one was the Orpheus that Aison’s son for a helper won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his high emprise, when he followed the pointing of Cheiron’s hand⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orpheus, who ruled o’er the Bistonid folk in Pieria-land.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And swiftly Asterion came, whom Komêtês begat by the side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Apidanus, there where his seaward-swirling waters glide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Peiresiae he dwelt, anigh to Phyllêion’s leafy crest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mighty Apidanus, sacred Enipeus, have thitherward pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To mingle the waters, far-severed that rise from the earth’s deep breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Polyphemus forsook Larissa, and unto Jason he sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eilatus’ son: in his youth mid the Lapithan heroes he fought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Lapithans armed them for fight, when the Centaur host they quelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their youngest he was; but now were his limbs sore burdened with eld.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet even as of old his heart with the spirit of battle swelled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor in Phylakê Iphiklus tarried to waste an inglorious life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncle of Aison’s child, for that Aison had taken to wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sister the Phylakid maiden Alkimêdê: wherefore strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was the love of his kin to constrain him to join that hero-throng.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Neither Admêtus in Pherae, the goodly land of sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his palace would tarry beneath Chalkodon’s mountain-steep.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Neither in Alopê tarried Echion and Erytus, sons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hermes, wealthy in corn-land, crafty-hearted ones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their kinsman, the third with these, came forth, on the Quest as they hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aithalides: where the streams of Amphrysus softly slide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him Eupolemeia the Phthian, Myrmidon’s daughter, bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But offspring of Antianeira the Menetid those twain were.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Came thither Korônus, forsaking Gyrton the wealthy town:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right valiant was Kaineus’ son, yet he passed not his father’s renown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For of Kaineus the poets have sung, how smitten of Centaurs he died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who could not be slain, when alone in his prowess, with none beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drave them before him in rout, but they rallied, and charged afresh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet availed not their fury to thrust him aback, nor to pierce his flesh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But unconquered, unflinching, down to the underworld he passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Battered from life by the storm of the massy pines that they cast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And came Titaresian Mopsus withal, unto whom was given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lêto’s son above all men the lore of the birds of the heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there was Eurydamas, Ktimenus’ son, which dwelt in the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Dolopian folk: by the Xynian mere did his palace stand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And from Opus Menoitius fared at Aktor his father’s behest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the end he might go with the chieftains of men on the glorious Quest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Eurytion hath followed with these; Eribôtes the mighty is gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, Teleon’s scion, and that, of Irus, Aktor’s son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in sooth it was Teleon begat Eribôtes the glory-crowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Irus, Eurytion. With these was a third, Oïleus, found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peerless in manhood, exceeding cunning to follow the flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the foe, when the reeling battalions were shattered before his might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Came the son of Kanêthus the scion of Abas; with eager speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came Kanthus forth of Euboea: it was not fate-decreed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That again he should turn and behold Kerinthus, for doomed was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even he and Mopsus withal, the wise in augury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perish in Libya, lost in the waste of a wide sand-sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooth, never was mischief removed too far to be found of the doomed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as in Libya’s desert were even these entombed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far from the Kolchian land as the space outstretched between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun’s uprising, and where the setting thereof is seen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Klytius and Iphitus gathered to that great mustering,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oichalia’s warders, children of Eurytus, ruthless king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who received of Far-smiter a bow; but he had no profit thereof,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in archery-skill with the giver’s self he wantonly strove.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with these fared Aiakus’ sons, yet not from the selfsame place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor together, for far had they wandered away from the home of their race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aegina, what time in their folly the blood of their brother they spilt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Phokus: to Salamis Telamon bare his burden of guilt:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Peleus roved till in Phthia the halls of the outcast he built.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with these from Kekropia Boutes, a lord of battle-fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stout Teleon’s son, and Phalêrus the mighty spearman came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was Alkon his father that sent him forth: no sons save him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had the ancient to cherish his age and his light of life grown dim:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, albeit his only-begotten he was, and the last of his line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sent him, that so amidst valour of heroes his prowess should shine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Theseus, of all the sons of Erechtheus most renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Tainarum under the earth by an unseen fetter was bound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he trod the Path of Fear with Peirithoüs; else that Quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the might of these had been lightlier compassed of all the rest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Tiphys, Hagnias’ son, hath forsaken the Thespians that dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the city of Siphas: of all men keenest was he to foretell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wrath of the waves on the broad sea, keen to foreknow from afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blasts of the storm, and to guide the galley by sun and by star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas Athênê Tritônis herself that made him eager-souled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To join that muster of heroes that longed his face to behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she fashioned the sea-swift ship, and Argus but wrought as she planned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arestor’s son, for the Goddess’s counsels guided his hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore amongst all ships unmatched was the ship that he made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even all that with swinging oars the paths of the sea have essayed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Came Phlias withal from Araithyriae to essay the Quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a wealthy home, for the toil of his hands had the Wine-god blessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His father, where welleth Asôpus up from the green hill’s breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Argos did sons of Bias, Arêius and Talaus, come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mighty Laodokus, fruit of Nêleus’ daughter’s womb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Pero, for whose sake Aiolus’ scion Melampus bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Iphiklus’ steading affliction of bonds exceeding sore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor yet did the prowess of mighty-hearted Herakles fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The longing of Aison’s son for his helping, as telleth the tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as soon as the flying rumour of gathering heroes he heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned from the track that he trod from Arcadia Argos-ward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the path that he paced as he bare that boar alive from the glen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lampeia, wherein he had battened, the vast Erymanthian fen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the entering-in of Mycenae’s market-stead he cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his mighty shoulders the beast, as he writhed in his bonds knit fast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But himself of his own will, thrusting Eurystheus’ purpose aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasted away; and Hylas, his henchman true and tried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which bare his arrows and warded his bow, with the hero hath hied.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therewithal hath the scion of god-descended Danaus gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nauplius, born unto King Klytonêus, Naubolus’ son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of Lernus Naubolus sprang; and Lernus, as bards have told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Proitus, Nauplius’ son; and unto Poseidon of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amymônê, Danaus’ daughter, who couched in the God’s embrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bare Nauplius, chief in the seafarer’s craft of the Earth-born race.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Last cometh Idmon the seer, of all that in Argos dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cometh knowing the doom he hath heard the birds of heaven foretell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the people should haply begrudge him a hero’s glorious fame:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet not of the very loins of Abas the doomed seer came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the son of Lêto begat him to share the noble name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aetolia’s sons, and in prophecy-lore he made him wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in signs of the fowl of the heaven and tokens ’mid flame that rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Polydeukes the strong did Aetolia’s Princess Leda speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Sparta, and Kastor cunning to rein the fleet-foot steed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These twain in Tyndareus’ palace, her dearly-beloved, her pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lady at one birth bare; howbeit she nowise denied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their prayer to depart, for her spirit was worthy of Zeus’ bride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Apharetus’ children, Lynkeus and Idas the arrogant-souled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Arênê went forth: in their prowess exceeding were these overbold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even both; but Lynkeus for eyes of keenest ken was renowned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If in sooth that story be true, that, though one lay underground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet lightly of Lynkeus’ eyes should the gloom-swathed corpse be found.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with these Periklymenus Nêleus’ son was enkindled to fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eldest of all the sons that the Lady of Pylos bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Nêleus the godlike; and might unmeasured Poseidon gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the prince, and a boon moreover, that whatso shape he should crave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, as he fought in the shock of the meeting ranks, he should have.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Arcadia Amphidamas and Kepheus came for the Quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who were dwellers in Tegea-town, and the land that Apheidas possessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two scions of Aleus; yea and a third followed even as they went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ankaius: Lykurgus his father was minded the lad to have sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being elder brother to these, but himself was constrained to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the city with Aleus, tending the dear head silver-grey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit in charge to his brethren twain he gave the lad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he went, and the fell of a bear Maenalian for buckler he had,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a battle-axe huge his right hand swung; for his armour of fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had his old grandsire in a secret chamber hidden from sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If haply so he might cripple the wings of the eagle’s flight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fared thither Augeias; they named him in songs of the olden day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Sun-god’s child, and the hero in Elis-land bare sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In pride of his wealth: but he longed to behold the Kolchian coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to look upon mighty Aiêtes the lord of the Kolchian host.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Asterius came, and Amphion, the sons that a fair queen bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Pellênê’s king Hyperasius dwelt in the city of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Pelles their grandsire built ’neath the cliffs of Achaia’s shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Euphêmus from Tainarus came to be joined to their company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Europê’s child; and the swiftest of all men on Earth was he:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the daughter of Tityos the giant couched in Poseidon’s embrace;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this their son would run o’er the grey sea’s weltering face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither sank in the surge his fast-flying steps, but, with foot-sole alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bedewed with the spray, on his watery path was he wafted on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sons of Poseidon beside him withal two other came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One leaving Miletus afar, the city of haughty fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Erginus, and one from Imbrasian Hêrê’s fane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parthenia, Ankaius the mighty; and men of renown were the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the craft of the sea, and withal in the toil of the battle-strain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hasting from Kalydon Oineus’ son to their muster hath hied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meleager the stalwart; and there was Laocoön still at his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother to Oineus; but not of the selfsame womb were they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a handmaid bare him; and him, though flecked was his hair with grey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For guide and for guard to his son hath Oineus the old king sent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So it fell that a beardless lad to the valorous gathering went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heroes; yet no man of all that came had the deeds outdone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the lad, save Herakles, if that he might but have tarried on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One year mid Aetolia’s sons, till he grew to his strength, I ween.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and his mother’s brother, a javelin-hurler keen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a warrior tried, when foot is set against foot in the fray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iphiklus, Thestius’ scion, trod the selfsame way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Came Palaimonius, whose grandsire was Olenius, and his sire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lernus in name; but in birth was he child of the Lord of Fire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore he halted in either foot; but his bodily frame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his prowess might no man contemn, for which cause also his name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was found with the mighty who won for Jason deathless fame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Came Iphitus, Ornytus’ son, from Phokis withal for the Quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Naubolus’ line: in the days overpast was Jason his guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time unto Pytho he fared to inquire of the high Gods’ doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touching the Quest; for he welcomed him then in his mountain home.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Zetes and Kalaïs withal, the North-wind’s children, were there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Oreithyia, Erechtheus’ daughter, to Boreas bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the uttermost part of wintry Thrace; for the God swooped down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Thracian North-wind snatched her away from Kekrops’ town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as she whirled in the dance on the lawn by Ilissus’ flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he brought her afar to the place where standeth the crag men know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Rock of Sarpedon, whereby doth Erginus the river glide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he shrouded her round with viewless clouds, and he made her his bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo, on the ankles of these did quivering pinions unfold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong wings, as in air they upleapt, a marvel great to behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleaming with golden scales; and about their shoulders strayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down-streaming from neck and from head in the glory of youth arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark tresses that tossed in the rushing breezes amidst them that played.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yea, and Akastus, his own son, had no will to abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day with his mighty sire in the halls of Pelias’ pride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor would Argus be left, who had wrought as Athênê guided his hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these twain needs must be numbered too with the glorious band.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This is the tale of the helpers with Aison’s son that were found:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These be the men whom the folk, even all which dwelt around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called ever the Minyan Chiefs: for of those that went on the Quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born of the daughters of Minyas’ blood were the most and the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, she which had borne this Jason to emprise perilous-wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alkimedê, also was daughter of Klymenê, Minyas’ child.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now when all things ready were made by the hands of many a thrall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even whatso the galley for sea ready-dight should be furnished withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When traffic lureth the shipmen afar to an alien land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then through the city they passed to their ship, where she lay on the strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which is called Magnesian Pagasae. Ever, as onward they strode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To right and to left a mingled multitude ran: but they showed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Radiant amidst them as stars amid clouds; and some ’gan cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they gazed on the glorious forms that in harness of war swept by:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What is in Pelias’ thoughts, King Zeus, that so goodly a band</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heroes is hurled by him forth of the Panachaian land?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the day of their coming with ravening fire the halls shall they fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aiêtes, except he shall yield them the Fleece of his own good will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a long way lieth between, unaccomplished yet is the toil.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake they on this side and that through the city: the women the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavenward uplifting their hands, to the Gods that abide for aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made vehement prayer for the heart’s delight of the homecoming day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one to another made answer, and moaned, as her tears fell fast:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hapless Alkimedê, thee too evil hath found at the last;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor to thee was vouchsafed amid bliss to the end of thy days to attain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe’s me for Aison the ill-starred!⁠—verily this had been gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him, if rolled in his shroud before this woeful day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep under Earth, with the cup of affliction untasted, he lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And O that the darkling surge, when Hellê the maiden died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had whelmed down Phrixus too with the ram!⁠—but a man’s voice cried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the throat of the monster, the portent accurst, that so it might doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Alkimedê sorrow and griefs untold in the days to come.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So ’mid the moan of the women marched the heroes along.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by this were the thralls and the handmaids gathered in one great throng.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then fell on his neck his mother, and sharply the anguish-thorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierced each soft breast, the while his father, the eld-forlorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close-swathed as a corpse on his bed, lay groaning and groaning again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the hero essayed to hush their laments and assuage their pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With words of cheer, and he spake, “Take up my war-array,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the thralls, and with downcast eyes did these in silence obey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his mother, as round her child her arms at the first she had flung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So clave she, and wept without stint: as the motherless maiden she clung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose forlorn little arms clasp fondly her grey old nurse, when the tide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cometh up of her woe:⁠—she hath no one to love her nor comfort beside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a weary lot is hers ’neath a stepdame’s tyrannous sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who with bitter revilings evil-entreateth her youth alway:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her heart as she waileth is cramped as by chains in her frenzied despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she cannot sob forth the anguish that struggleth for utterance there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So stintlessly wept Alkimedê, so in her arms did she strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her son; and she cried from the depths of her love and her yearning pain:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh, that on that same day when I, the affliction-oppressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearkened the voice of Pelias the king, and his evil behest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had yielded up the ghost, and forgotten to mourn and to weep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thyself, that thine own dear hands, in the grave might have laid me to sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O my beloved!⁠—for this was the one wish unfulfilled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with other thy nursing-dues long had mine heart in contentment been stilled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, of Achaia’s daughters the envied in days that are gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a bondwoman now in tenantless halls shall be left alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pining, a hapless mother, in yearning for thee, my pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And exceeding delight in the days overpast, for whom I untied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the first time and last my zone; for to me beyond others the doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the stern Birth-goddess begrudged abundant fruit of the womb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah me for my blindness of heart!⁠—not once, not in dreams, might I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vision of Phrixus’ deliverance turned to a curse for me!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So mourned she, and ever she moaned amidst of her speech, and thereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood her handmaids, and echoed her wail, an exceeding bitter cry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the hero with gentle words for her comfort made answer, and spake:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fill me not thus overmeasure with anguish of soul for thy sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother mine, forasmuch as from evil thou shalt not redeem me so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thy tears, but shalt add the rather woe unto weight of woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Gods mete out unto mortals afflictions unforeseen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore be strong to endure their doom, though thine anguish be keen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take comfort to think that Athênê hereunto our courage hath stirred:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remember the oracles: call to remembrance how good was the word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phoebus: be glad for this hero-array for mine help that is come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, mother, do thou with thine handmaids in quiet abide in thine home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither be as a bird ill-omened to bode my ship ill-speed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And escort of clansmen and thralls thy son to the galley shall lead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and turned him, and forth of his halls his way hath he ta’en.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as goeth Apollo forth of his incense-bearing fane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Delos the hallowed, or Klaros, or Pytho the place of his shrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or Lycia the wide, where the waters of Xanthus ripple and shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So seemed he, as onward he pressed through the throng, and a loud acclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their mingled cheering arose. And there met him an ancient dame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iphias, priestess of Artemis warder of tower and wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At his right hand caught she, and kissed it, but spake no word at all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she could not, how fain soe’er, so pressed the multitude on;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she drifted away to the fringe of the crowd, and was left alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the old be left by the young: and he passed on afar, and was gone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when he had left the streets of the city builded fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the beach Pagasaean he came, and his comrades hailed him there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a throng abiding beside the Argo ship as she lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the river’s mouth, and overagainst her gathered they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they looked, and behold, Adrastus and Argus hasting amain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thitherward from the city, and sorely they marvelled, beholding the twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despite the purpose of Pelias thitherward hurrying fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his shoulders a bull’s hide Argus the son of Arestor had cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great, dark with the fell; but the prince in a mantle fair was arrayed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twofold: Pelopeia his sister the gift in his hand had laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit Jason forbare to ask them of this or of that;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he bade them for council sit them down where the others sat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So there upon folded sails, and the mast as it lay along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Row upon row were the heroes sitting all in a throng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to these of his heart’s good will the son of Aison spake:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What things soever it needeth that sea-bound galleys should take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this ready dight for our going lieth in seemly array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore for these things’ sake will we make no longer delay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our sailing, so soon as the breezes but blow for the voyage begun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, friends⁠—since in hope for the home-return to our land we be one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And one in the way we must take to Aiêtes, the path of the Quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore do ye now choose with hearts ungrudging our best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be chief and captain, to order all our goings aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take on him our quarrels with aliens, and pledge our covenant-plight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and the youths upon valiant Herakles turned their eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he sat in their midst, and from all the heroes did one shout rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crying “Our captain be thou!”⁠—but not from his place he stirred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he stretched his right hand forth, and he answered and spake the word:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Let no man offer this honour to me: I will nowise consent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if any man else would arise, I will also withstand his intent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The selfsame man who assembled our band, let him too lead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake in his greatness of soul, and they shouted, praising the rede</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Herakles: then did Jason the warrior wight rejoice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he sprang to his feet, and he spake in their midst with eager voice:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If indeed ye be minded on me this glorious charge to cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let our voyaging tarry no more; suffice the delays overpast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, even now, let us offer to Phoebus the sacrifice meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And prepare us a feast even here; and, while yet tarry the feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my thralls, overseers of my steading, which bear in charge my command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fitly to choose for us beasts from the herd, and to drive to the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We will launch on the sea our ship, we will set up her tackling therein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thwart by thwart cast lots for the place each oarsman shall win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Apollo, the Seafarers’ Saviour, uppile we then on the beach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An altar; for whatso I needs must do hath he promised to teach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to show us the paths of the sea, if first with sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I seek unto him, or ever I strive with the king for the prize.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and turned him first to the work; and, his call to obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heroes arose, and their garments row upon row heaped they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a smooth rock-shelf: the waves of the sea beat not thereon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the dash of the stormy brine had cleansed it long agone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, giving heed to the counsels of Argus, stoutly they braced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship with a hawser deftly twisted that girded her waist;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they strained it from side to side, that the beams to the bolts might hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast, and withstand the might of the meeting surge on-rolled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a trench, in compass as great as the width of the galley, they delved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And overagainst her prow to the sea so far it shelved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the space that the hull should run, by the might of their hands on-sped:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And deepening ever afront of her stern they scooped that bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smoothly-shaven rollers they laid in the furrow arow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then down on the foremost rollers slowly they tilted her prow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That adown them one after other with one smooth rush she might slide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter above did they pass the oars from side to side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the tholes did they lash them, outstanding a cubit on either hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to right of the ship and to left at these did they take their stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with chest and with hands against them they bare, and to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went Tiphys the while, to shout in the season the yo-heave-ho.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then gave he the word with a mighty shout, and the youths forthright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drave her with one rush down, as they thrust with their uttermost might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her berth in the sand, as with feet hard-straining strongly they stepped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forcing her forward, and Pelian Argo seaward swept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full swiftly, and shouted they all, as to right and to left they leapt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And under the massy keel’s heavy grinding groaned aloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rollers, and spirted about them the smoke in a dusky cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath the crushing weight: and into the sea she slid, and her crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back with the hawsers warped her, and stayed her as onward she flew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the oars to the tholes they fitted on either side, and the mast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the well-fashioned sails, and the tackling withal, therein they cast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But soon as with diligent heed they had ordered all things so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First cast they the lots for the thwarts whereat each man should row,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Allotting one unto two men still; but the midmost thwart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Herakles chose they first, from the rest of the heroes apart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ankaius the dweller in Tegea-town for his fellow they chose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the midmost place of the benches they left unchallenged to those,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither cast for them lots; and with one consent of the voices of them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Tiphys was given the helm of the galley of goodly stem.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then did they heap of the stones of the shingle, and, nigh at hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sea, an altar they reared to Apollo the Lord of the Strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is called the Lord of the farers a-shipboard withal, and in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Billets of olive-wood sapless and dry thereon they placed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by this were the herdmen of Aison’s son drawn nigh thereto</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing oxen twain from the herd; and these the young men drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set them beside the altar; and others stood thereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the water of sacrifice and the meal. And now drew nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jason, and unto Apollo his fathers’ god did he cry:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hearken, O King, who in Pagasae dwellest, whose fair halls be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the city Aisonian, named of my sire, who didst promise to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I sought unto thee at Pytho, to point me my journey’s goal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fulfilment; for thou, even thou, to the emprise didst kindle my soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now therefore my ship with my comrades safe and sound bring thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither, and back unto Hellas again: and to thee do we vow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as many of us as shall win safe home, on thine altar to lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burnt offerings so many of goodly bulls: therewithal will I pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Pytho thy shrine, and Ortygia, other gifts beyond price.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come then, Far-smiter, accept at our hands this sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which now, at our going abroad, for the sake of this our ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We offer, our first of all: and with prosperous weird may I slip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hawsers, by thy devising: and soft bid blow the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereby we may fare on ever through calm of summer seas.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With the prayer then cast he the meal: and now for the slaughtering these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girded themselves, Ankaius the mighty, and Herakles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this with his club on the forehead smote the steer mid-head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heavily all in a heap to the earth it dropped down dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Ankaius hewed with his brazen axe at the second steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the broad neck: clean through the sinews strong thereof did it shear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there on the earth, with horns doubled under its chest, it lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swiftly their comrades severed the throats, and the skins did they flay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they sundered the joints, and they carved, and the sacred thighs they cut out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they laid them together, and closely with fat they wrapped them about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burnt on the cloven wood: drink-offerings unmingled of wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poured Aison’s son; and Idmon rejoiced, beholding shine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The splendour that gleamed all round from the sacrifice and the smoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As forth for an omen of good in wavering wreaths it broke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the purpose of Lêto’s son, nothing doubting, straightway he spoke:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For you ’tis ordained of the doom of the Gods and of each man’s fate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither to win with the Fleece; but meanwhile lie in wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toils without number, as thither ye fare, and as backward ye hie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for me by the hateful doom of a God is it fated to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far hence, I know not where, on the Asian mainland shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, this is my doom: by birds evil-boding I knew it before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet from my fatherland went I: to sail in your galley I came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so to mine house might be left the renown of a hero’s name.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and the young men, hearing the words of the prophet, were glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their home-return, but for Idmon’s doom were their hearts made sad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so, at the hour when the sun from his noon-halt sinketh adown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over the harvest-lands the long rock-shadows are thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the sun to the eventide dusk slow-slideth aslant from the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then did the heroes all on the sands of the beach pile high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A couch of the wildwood leaves, and in front of the surf-line hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Row upon row lay down, and beside them was measureless store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of meats, and of sweet strong wine which the cupbearers poured for them out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the pitchers: thereafter they told, as each man’s turn came about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Story and legend, as young men oft at the feast and the bowl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will take their delight, when insatiate violence is far from their soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there was Aison’s son, as a man in a nightmare dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggling with deep dark thoughts, and as one distraught did he seem;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Idas marked him askance, and he shouted in scoffing tone:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What thoughts to and fro in thine heart art thou turning, thou Aison’s son?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak out in our midst thy mind! Hath fear in thy spirit awoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overmastering thee⁠—that thing which dazeth dastard folk?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be witness my furious spear, wherewithal beyond others I win</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renown in the wars⁠—nor is Zeus so present a helper therein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor so mighty to save as my spear⁠—that on thee no deadly bane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall light, nor shall any strife of thine hands be striven in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Idas attendeth thee, not though against thee a God should arise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a helper is this thou hast won from Arênê for thine emprise.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and the brimming beaker with both hands lifted he up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the strong wine drank unmingled, and dashed with the dew of the cup</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were his lips and his swarthy cheeks: but a startled clamour broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From all together; and openly Idmon rebuked him, and spoke:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Beshrew thee!⁠—thy thoughts thus soon to thyself are deadly and fell!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath the strong wine caused thy reckless heart for thy ruin to swell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy breast, and eggeth thee on to set the Gods at nought?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other words of comfort there be wherewithal a man might have sought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hearten his friend; but thy words were wholly presumptuous-bold!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So blustered, as telleth the tale, against the Blessèd of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Alôeus: and thou⁠—thou art nothing so mighty as they</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In manhood: yet both did the swift shafts overmaster and slay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Son of Latona, though giants they were and passing strong.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Aphareus’ son brake forth into laughter loud and long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blinking upon him in drunken wise flung back the jeer:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come now, by thy deep divination reveal unto me, thou seer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the Gods for me also be bringing to pass such doom as that</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which was dealt of that father of thine to the sons that Alôeus begat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bethink thee how thou shalt escape from mine hands alive, if we find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee guilty of boding a prophecy vain as the idle wind!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wrathfuller waxed he in railing: and now had the strife run high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But amidst of their wrangling their comrades with loud indignant cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Aison’s son, restrained them:⁠—and lo, with his lyre upheld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his left hand, Orpheus arose, and the fountain of song upwelled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And he sang how in the beginning the earth and the heaven and the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the selfsame form were blended together in unity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how baleful contention each from other asunder tore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he sang of the goal of the course in the firmament fixed evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the stars and the moon, and the printless paths of the journeying sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how the mountains arose, how rivers that babbling run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They and their Nymphs, were born, and whatso moveth on Earth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he sang how Ophion at first, and Eurynomê, Ocean’s birth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lordship of all things sat on Olympus’ snow-crowned height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how Ophion must yield unto Kronos’ hands and his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she unto Rhea, and into the Ocean’s waves plunged they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the blessed Titan-gods these twain for a space held sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Zeus as yet was a child, while yet as a child he thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dwelt in the cave Dictaean, while yet the time was not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Earth-born Cyclops the thunderbolt’s strength to his hands should give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even thunder and lightning: by these doth Zeus his glory receive.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Low murmured the lyre, and slept, and the voice divine was still:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But moveless the heads of them all are bending forward, and thrill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their eager-listening ears, through the hush as they strain, in thrall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the spell; such wondrous glamour the song hath cast over all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a little thereafter they mingled, even as is meet and right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wine, and poured on the tongues where the altar-fires blazed bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turned they to sleep, and around them were folded the wings of the night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when radiant Dawn with her flashing eyes on the steeps looked down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pelion’s crests, and, washed by the wind, the forelands that frown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the tossing sea rose sharp and clear to view,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Tiphys awoke, and he hasted the Argo’s hero-crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hie them aboard, and to range the oars in order due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a weird dread cry from the haven of Pagasae rang to them; yea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pelian Argo herself came a voice, bidding hasten away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For within her a beam divine had been laid, which Athênê brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the oak Dodonaean, and into the midst of her stem was it wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the heroes went up to the thwarts, and twain after twain arow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as fell the places by lot but a little ago,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orderly ranged sat down, and by each was his harness of fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the midmost Ankaius, and next him Herakles’ giant might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat, and beside him he laid his club; and the keel of the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under his massy tread plunged deep. And now did they slip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hawsers, and poured on the sea the wine. Tear-dimmed that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were Jason’s eyes, from the fatherland-home as he turned them away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these⁠—as the youths that in Pytho begin unto Phoebus the dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Ortygia, or there where Ismenus’ ripples in sunlight glance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hand in hand to the notes of the lyre his altar around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rhythmical fall of the feet swift-circling beat the ground⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So smote with the oars, by the lyre of Orpheus timing the stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea’s wild water, and over the blades the surges broke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on this side and that with the foam the dark brine seething flashed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like muttered thunder it sounded by strokes of the mighty updashed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glanced in the sun like flame, as the ship winged onward her flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their armour: the wake far-weltering ever behind gleamed white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As an oft-trodden path through a grassy plain lieth clear in sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the Gods that day from the height of the heaven looked down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the ship, and the might of the demigod heroes, the men of renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sailing the sea; and afar on the crests of the hill-tops lone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Maids of the Mountain, the Pelian Nymphs, in amaze looked on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the work of Athênê Itônis, the heroes’ goodly array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the ashen blades in their hands kept time with measured sway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and there came one down from the mountain’s height to the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Cheiron, Philyra’s son, and plashed the surf-wash hoar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his feet, as his broad hand waving many a farewell sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he shouted, “Good speed, and a sorrowless home-return!” as they went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there was his wife, with Peleus’ babe in her arms held high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Achilles, waving a greeting as sped his sire thereby.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when they had rounded the headland, and left the haven behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the cunning and wisdom of Hagnias’ son the prudent of mind⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even of Tiphys, who swayed in the master-craftsman’s grip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The helm smooth-shaven, to guide unswerving the course of the ship⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then set they up in the centre-block the towering mast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on either hand strained taut the stays, and they lashed them fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sail they unfurled therefrom, from the yard-arm spreading it wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a breeze shrill-piping upsprang, and the sheets upon either side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the polished pins on the deck then cast they in order meet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And past the long Tisaian ness did they restfully fleet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Orpheus, in song whose rhythmical cadence kept time to the lyre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang of the Saviour of Ships, the Child of the Glorious Sire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Artemis, she that hath those crags of the sea in her keeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lady that wardeth Iolkos-land. And the fishes leaping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up from the deep sea came, and, drawn by the spell of the lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both small and great followed gambolling over the watery way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when in the track of a shepherd, the warder of flocks on the wold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow sheep that have fed to the full of the grass, a throng untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he goeth before with his shrill reed piping them home to the fold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sweetly he fluteth a shepherd’s strain⁠—so over the seas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed the fishes: on wafted her ever the chasing breeze.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And ere long melting in haze the Pelasgians’ land of corn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sank out of sight; and past Mount Pelion’s cliffs were they borne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye running onward; and sank in the offing the Sepian strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sea-girt Skiathos rose, and a far-away gleam of sand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Peiresian beach and Magnesian, clear in the summer air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the mainland; and lo, the barrow of Dolops: at eventide there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beached they the ship, for against them the veering breeze had turned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they honoured the dead, and victims of sheep in the gloaming they burned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the sea-surge stormily tossed. Two days to and fro on the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They loitered, but ran on the third their galley asea once more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the broad sail spread they on high, and the keel from the strand shot away:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men call it “The Launching of Argo”⁠—Aphetai⁠—unto this day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Onward they ran, ever onward: they left Meliboia behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They caught but a glimpse of the foam-flecked beach of the stormy wind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with dawning on Homolê looked they, and lo, it was looming anigh;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad-couched on the breast of the waters it lay as they passed it by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter full soon by the outfall of Amyrus’ flood must they fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eurymenê then, and the surf-tormented gorges they spied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Olympus’ and Ossa’s seaward face: wind-wafted they ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the slopes of Pallênê; beyond Kanastra’s foreland-height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They passed, running lightly before the breath of the breeze in the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And before them at dawn on-speeding the pillar of Athos rose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Thracian mountain: its topmost peak’s dark shadow it throws</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far as a merchantman goodly-rigged in a day might win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to Lemnos’ isle, and the city Myrinê therein.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wind blew all that day till the folds of the darkness fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blew ever fresh, and the sail strained over the broad sea-swell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit the wind’s breath failed them at going down of the sun:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So to Lemnos the craggy, the Sintian isle, by rowing they won.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There all the men of the nation together pitilessly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the violent hands of the women were slain in the year gone by;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as the hearts of the men from their lawful wives had turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in love for their captive handmaids with baleful passion they burned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maids that themselves from the Thracian land in foray had brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oversea:⁠—’twas the wrath of the Cyprian Queen that curse had wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because that for long they had left her unhonoured by sacrifice:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah hapless, whose hungering jealousy craved that woeful price!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not with the captives their husbands alone for the sin did they slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But every male therewithal, lest perchance in the coming day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of these might arise an avenger for that grim murder’s sake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one alone for an aged sire did compassion awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hypsipylê, daughter of Thoas, the king of the folk of the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an ark did she send him to drift o’er the sea from the murder-strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he haply might ’scape. And fisher-folk saved him and brought to the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which men call Sikinus now, but Oinoë named it erewhile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For from Sikinus folk renamed it, the child whom the Maid of the Spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oinoë, bare, when she couched in love with Thoas the king.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So it came to pass that for these to tend the kine, and to wear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>War-harness of brass, and to furrow the wheat-bearing land with the share,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the eyes of them all seemed task more light than Athênê’s toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewithal were their hands aforetime busy: yet all the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Across the broad sea ever they cast and anon their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a haunting fear lest the Thracian sails in the offing should rise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when they beheld the Argo’s oars flashing down to their coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth from the gates of Myrinê straightway in one great host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad in their harness of battle down to the beach they poured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like unto ravening Thyiads: they weened that the Thracian horde</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were come: and there was Hypsipylê clad in the war-array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thoas her father: and all these speechless with wildered dismay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streamed down⁠—such panic was wafted about them all that day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But forth of the galley the while had the chieftains sent to the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aithalides, their herald swift, the man who bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charge of their messages, yea, and the wand they committed to him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hermes his sire, who had given him memory never made dim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all things:⁠—yea, nor forgetfulness swept even now o’er his soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of long-left Acheron’s flow, where the torrents unspeakable roll.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the doom of his spirit is fixed, to and fro evermore is it swept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now numbered with ghosts underground, now back to the light hath it leapt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the beams of the sun among living men:⁠—but why should I tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The story of Aithalides that all men know full well?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him was Hypsipylê won to receive that sea-borne array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As waned the day to the gloaming: yet not with the new-born day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmoored they the ship for the North-wind’s breathing to waft away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Through the city the daughters of Lemnos into the folkmote pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there sat down, as Hypsipylê’s self sent forth her behest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when they were gathered in one great throng to the market-stead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their counselling straightway she rose in the midst of them all, and she said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Friends, now, an ye will, good store of gifts to the men give we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even such as is meet that the farers a-shipboard should bear oversea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even meats and the sweet strong wine, that without our towers so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They may bide, nor for need’s sake passing amidst of us to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May know of us all too well, and our evil report shall go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar, for a terrible deed have we wrought, and in no wise, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good in their sight shall it seem, if they haply shall hear the tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, this is our counsel, and this, meseemeth, best shall avail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if any amidst you hath counsel that better shall serve our need</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let her rise; for to this have I summoned you, even the giving of rede.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and sat her down on the ancient chair of stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That of old was her sire’s, and Polyxo her nurse uprose thereupon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her wrinkle-shrivelled feet she halted for very eld</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowed over a staff; but with longing for speech the heart in her swelled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hard by her side were there sitting ancient maidens four,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Virgins, whose heads with the thin white hair were silvered o’er.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And amidst of the folkmote stood she, and up from her crook-bowed back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feebly a little she lifted her neck, and in this wise spake:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Gifts, even as unto the lady Hypsipylê seemeth meet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send we to the strangers, for thus were it better their coming to greet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you⁠—by what art or device shall ye save your souls alive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If a Thracian host burst on you, or cometh in battle to strive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some other foe?⁠—there be many such chances to men that befall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as now yon array cometh unforeseen of us all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if one of the Blessèd should turn this affliction away, there remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Countless afflictions beside, far worse than the battle’s strain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when through the gates of the grave the older women have passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And childless the younger have won to a joyless eld at the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How then will ye live, O hapless?⁠—what, will the beasts freewilled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On their own necks cast the yoke, to the end that your lands may be tilled?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the furrow-sundering share will they drag through the heavy loam?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as rolleth the year round, straight will they bring you the harvest home?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, albeit from me the Fates still shrink as in loathing and fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet surely on me, when the feet draw nigh of another year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth shall lie, when the burial rites have been rendered to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as is due, and the evil days I shall not see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for you which be younger, I counsel you, give good heed unto this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that now at your feet an open way of deliverance there is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ye will but commit your dwellings and all your spoil to the guard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the strangers, yea, and your goodly city for these to ward.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and with clamour the folkmote was filled, for good in their eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was the word, and straightway thereafter again did Hypsipylê rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her voice pealed over the multitude, stilling the mingled cries:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If in sooth in the sight of you all well-pleasing is this same rede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the ship straightway a messenger hence will I speed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To Iphinoê which waited beside her spake she her hest:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Up, Iphinoê, and to yonder man bear this my request,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he come to our town, even he who is chief of the strangers’ array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the word that pleaseth the heart of my people to him would I say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and his fellows bid thou to light in friendship down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On our shore, if they will, and to enter undismayed our town.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She spake, and dismissed the assembly, and homeward she wended her way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Iphinoê to the Minyans went; and they bade her say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was the mind wherewithal she was come, and what her need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway she told them the words of her message with eager speed:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The daughter of Thoas, Hypsipylê, sent me hither away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To summon the lord of your ship, and the captain of your array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the will of her folk she may tell him, their heart’s desire this day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and his fellows she biddeth to light in friendship down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On our shore, if they will, and to enter undismayed our town.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake she, and fair in the sight of them all was the word that she said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they deemed that Hypsipylê reigned in the room of Thoas dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His daughter, his well-beloved; and they hasted Jason to meet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The island-queen, and they dight them to follow their captain’s feet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then he flung o’er his shoulders the web by the Goddess Itonian wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the clasp of a brooch were the folds of the purple of Pallas caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which she gave, when for Argo’s building the keel-props first she dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taught him with rule of the shipwright to measure her timbers aright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More easy it were in sooth on the sun at his rising to gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to fasten thine eyes on the flush of its glory, its splendour-blaze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the fashion thereof in the midst was fiery crimson glow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the top was of purple throughout; and above on the marge and below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picture by picture did many a broidered marvel show.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For therein were the Cyclopes bowed o’er their work that perisheth not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forging the levin of Zeus the King, and so far was it wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its fiery splendour, that yet of its flashes there lacked but one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the giant smiths with their sledges of iron were smiting thereon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While forth of it spurts as of flaming breath ever leapt and anon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And there were the sons of Asôpus’ daughter Antiopê set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amphion and Zethus: and Thêbê, with towers ungirded as yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood nigh them; and lo, the foundations thereof were they laying but now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fierce haste. Zethus had heaved a craggy mountain’s brow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his shoulders: as one hard straining in toil did the image appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Amphion the while to his golden lyre sang loud and clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On-pacing; and twice so great was the rock that followed anear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And next Kythereia with tresses heavily drooping was shown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the buckler of onset of Arês she bare: from her shoulder the zone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her tunic over her left arm fell with a careless grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low over her breast; and ever she seemed on the shield to gaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the face that out of its brazen mirror smiled to her face.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And therein was a herd of shaggy kine; for the winning thereof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Elektryon’s sons and Teleboan raiders in battle strove:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For these were defending their own; but the Taphian rovers were fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rob them; and drenched was the dewy meadow with that red rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with that overmastering host were the herdmen striving in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And therein had been fashioned chariots twain in the race that sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pelops was guiding the car that afront in the contest fled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Hippodameia beside him rode that fateful race.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rushing behind him Myrtilus scourging his steeds gave chase;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Oinomaus with him had couched his lance with a murderous face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, as snapt at the nave the axle, aslant was he falling in dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as at Pelops’ back he was aiming the treacherous thrust.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And therein was Phoebus Apollo, a slender stripling yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shooting at him who the ravisher’s hand to the veil had set</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his mother, at Tityos the giant, whom Elarê bare; but the Earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursed him, and hid in her womb, and gave to him second birth.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And Phrixus the Minyan was there; and it seemed that unto the ram</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He verily hearkened; it seemed that a voice from the gold-fleeced came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wert hushed to behold them⁠—wouldst cheat thy soul with the hope that perchance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth of the lifeless lips would break the utterance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of speech⁠—ay, long wouldst thou gaze in expectation’s trance.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Such was the gift of Athênê, the Goddess Itonian’s toil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a lance far-leaping he grasped in his right hand, given erewhile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the maid Atalanta on Mainalus’ height for the pledge of a friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladly she met him, for sorely her soul desired to wend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Quest: howbeit the hero himself withheld the maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the peril of bitter strife for her love’s sake made him afraid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So he hied him to go to the town, as the radiant star to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which a maid, as she draweth her newly-woven curtain’s fold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholdeth, as over her dwelling upward it floateth fair;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it charmeth her eyes, flashing out of the depths of the darkling air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flushed with a crimson glory: the maid’s heart leapeth then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovesick for the youth who is far away amid alien men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her betrothed, unto whom her parents shall wed her on some glad day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So as a star was the hero treading the cityward way.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when he had passed through the gates, and within the city he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The women thereof thronged after, and wafted him blithe acclaim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having joy of the stranger: but earthward ever his eyes he cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pacing unfaltering on till he came to the palace at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hypsipylê: then at the hero’s appearing the maids flung wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gates and the fair-fashioned boards of the leaves on either side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then through the beautiful hall did Iphinoê lead on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly, and caused him to sit on a tinsel-glittering throne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Facing the Queen; and Hypsipylê turned her eyes away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the maiden blood flushed hot in her cheek. But her shame that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tied not her tongue, and with crafty-winsome words did she say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Stranger, wherefore so long have ye tarried without our towers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as no man dwelleth within this city of ours;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these have betaken them hence to dwell on the Thracian shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there are they ploughing the wheat-bearing lands. I will tell thee o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The evil tale, to the end ye also may understand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the days when Thoas my father was king o’er the folk of the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My people in ships from Lemnos over the sea-ridges rode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And harried the homes of the Thracians that overagainst us abode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with booty untold they returned, and with many a captive maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the curse of a baneful Goddess upon them now was laid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Cyprian caused on their souls heart-ruining blindness to fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they hated their lawful wives, and forth from bower and hall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the beck of their folly they drove the Lemnian matrons away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beside those spear-won thralls in the bed of love they lay⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cruel ones! Sooth, long time we endured it, if haply again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though late, their hearts might be turned; but our wrong and our bitter pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waxed evermore twofold; and the children of true-born blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In our halls were dishonoured, and grew up amidst us a bastard brood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and our maids unwedded, and widowed wives thereto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncared for about our city wandered to and fro.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No father had heeded, no, never so little, his daughter’s plight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not though before his eyes he beheld her slain outright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a tyrannous stepdame’s hands: and sons would defend no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mother from outrage and shame, as they wont in the days of yore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No love for a sister then the heart of the brother bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only the handmaid-thralls in the home found grace in their sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dance, in the market-place, and whenso the banquet was dight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at last some God in our hearts this desperate courage awoke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more to receive them, when back they returned from the Thracian folk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our towers within, that so they might heed the right, or begone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence to another land, even they and their thralls war-won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then required they of us their sons, even what manchild soe’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been left in the town, and returned unto Thrace; and to this day there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lemnian men on the snowy Thracian corn-lands dwell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then tarry ye sojourning here: and if haply it please thee well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To abide in the land, and it seem to thee good, of a surety thine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be Thoas my father’s honour. I ween this land of mine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt scorn not, for passing fruitful it is above all the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the myriad isles that lie on the broad Aegean’s breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But come now, go to thy galley, and tell these words of ours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto thy comrades, nor longer tarry without our towers.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She ended, with fair words veiling the deed of murder dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done on the men; and the hero answered the queen, and he said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hypsipylê, passing welcome this thy request shall be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou tenderest us, whose desire withal is now unto thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back through thy town will I come, when an end I have made to say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this to my fellows in order: howbeit let all the sway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the lordship be thine in the island. I make not in scorn my request,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a sore task thrusteth me onward still, and I may not rest.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake, and the queen’s right hand hath he touched, and aback to the strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath turned him to go; and around him the maidens on either hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Danced blithely, a throng unnumbered, till forth of the gates he had strode.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereafter the women loaded them wains smooth-running, and rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down to the beach, and gifts of greeting they bare good store,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When now to his fellows the hero had told the message o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Hypsipylê spake unto him when she sent and bade him come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with little ado the maidens drew the heroes home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their halls; for sweet desire did the Lady of Cyprus awake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a grace to Hephaistus the Lord of Craft, that Lemnos might take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>New life, and unruined be peopled of men once more for his sake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now into Hypsipylê’s royal palace Aison’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath passed, and the rest, as it happed unto each man, so are they gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save Herakles only; for still with the ship would the hero abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he willed it so, and a few his chosen comrades beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway rejoiced the city with dance and with festival,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was filled with sacrifice-steam to the Deathless: but most of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honoured they Hêrê’s glorious son, and atonement’s price</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Cyprian Queen they paid with song and with sacrifice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever from day unto day did the heroes their sailing forbear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loth to depart; and long had they tarried loitering there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Herakles gathered his comrades, and drew from the women apart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with words of upbraiding he spake, and rebuked them indignant of heart:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What, sirs, is it blood of kindred spilt that maketh us roam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From our land?⁠—or came ye, because that ye found no brides at home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hitherward, scorning the maidens of Greece? Doth it please you to toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here dwelling, and driving the plough through the soft smooth Lemnian soil?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good sooth, but little renown shall we win of our tarrying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here long time with the stranger women! No God will bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Fleece unto us, nor wrest from its warder, for our request!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth let us go each man to his place⁠—<em>him</em> leave ye to rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day on Hypsipylê’s couch, till he people from shore to shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemnos with menfolk: great his renown shall be therefor!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So did he chide with the band; was none dared meet his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither look in his face, nor was any man found that essayed reply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But straight from his presence, to make their departing ready, they went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste; and the women came running, so soon as they knew their intent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when round beautiful lilies the wild bees hum at their toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their hive in the rock forth pouring; the dew-sprent meadow the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around them rejoiceth, and hovering, stooping, now and again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sip of the sweet flower-fountains⁠—in such wise round the men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth streamed the women with yearning faces, making their moan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with hands caressing and soft sad words did they greet each one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beseeching the Blessed to grant them a homecoming void of bane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, so doth Hypsipylê pray, as her clinging fingers strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand of Jason, and stream her tears with the parting-pain:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go thou, and thee may the Gods with thy comrades scathless bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Back to the home-land, bearing the Fleece of Gold to the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as thou wilt, and thine heart desireth: and this mine isle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my father’s sceptre withal, shall wait for thee the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If haply, thine homecoming won, thou wouldst choose to come hither again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou couldst gather from other cities a host unnumbered of men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightly⁠—ah, but the longing shall never awaken in thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and mine own heart bodeth that this shall never be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet O remember Hypsipylê whilst thou art far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when home thou hast won; and leave me a word that thy love shall obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy, if the Gods shall vouchsafe me to bear a son to my lord.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lovingly looked on her Aison’s son, and he spake the word:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hypsipylê, so may the Gods bring all these blessings to be!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit a better wish than this frame thou for me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as by Pelias’ grace it sufficeth me still to live</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the home-land⁠—only the Gods from my toils deliverance give!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But and if to return to the land of Hellas be not my doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afar as I sail, and a fair manchild be the fruit of thy womb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pelasgian Iolkos send him, when boyhood and manhood be met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my father and mother, to solace their grief⁠—if living yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haply he find them⁠—that so, in the stead of the prince their son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They may win in their halls a dear one, to brighten the hearth left lone.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spake, and was gone; and afront of his fellows he strode to the ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rest of the chiefs followed on, and the oars in their hands did they grip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Row upon row as they sat; and the hawsers did Argus cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loose from the rock brine-lashed; and mightily then and fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell they to smiting with oars long-bladed the seething wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at even by Orpheus’ counsel the keel ashore they drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the isle of Elektra the daughter of Atlas, that there they might learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mystic rites whose unveiling is not soul-daunting nor stern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And safelier so might voyage over the chill grey sea:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more will I speak of the Hidden Things⁠—but a blessing be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon that same isle, and the Gods there dwelling, to whom belong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those rites whereof it is not vouchsafed that we tell in song.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And from thence o’er the Black Sea’s depths unfathomed they sped with the oar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To leftward keeping the land of Thrace, and to rightward the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Imbros overagainst it; and, even as sank the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the long sea-foreland of Chersonese they won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There did the strong swift south-wind blow, and the sail they spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the breeze, and into the outward-rushing waters they sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Athamas’ daughter: and lo, astern with the morning light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The outsea lay, and along Rhœteion’s beach in the night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They coasted, and still on their right the land Idaean lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they left Dardania behind, and Abydos-ward steered they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Perkotê in that same night, and Abarnis’ stretches of sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward they glided, and past Pityeia the hallowed land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the selfsame night, as with sails and with oars sped Argo on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the sea-gorge darkly-swirling of Hellespont they won.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now within the Propontis an island there is, both high and steep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short space from the corn-blest Phrygian land doth it rise from the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seaward-sloped: to the mainland stretched a neck of land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low as the wash of the sea; so the place hath a twofold strand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beyond the waterfloods of Aisêpus the river they lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Hill of the Bears it is called of them that dwell thereby.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cruel oppressors and fierce have there their robber-hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth-born, a marvel great for the dwellers around to behold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six mighty arms each monster uplifteth against a foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even two from his brawny shoulders that spring, and therebelow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four other, that out of his sides exceeding terrible grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now Dolian men on the isthmus abode, and about the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And amidst them did Kyzikus, hero-son of Aineus, reign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son whom Ainêtê, the daughter of godlike Eusôrus, bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But these men the Earth-born giants, how mighty and dreadful soe’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In no wise harried: their shield and defender Poseidon became,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For himself had begotten of old the first of the Dolian name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thitherward Argo, as chased by the Thracian breezes she fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed, and the goodly haven received her as onward she sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their light-weight anchor-stone did they cast away thereby</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Tiphys’ behest, and they left it beside the fountain to lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Artakia’s spring; and another they chose, huge, meet for their need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit their first, by Archer Apollo’s oracle-rede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ionian Neleïds laid thereafter, a hallowed stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the shrine of Athênê, Jason’s friend, as was meet to be done.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And in all lovingkindness the Dolians came, and to meet them pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kyzikus’ self, when their lineage he heard, and was ware of the Quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew what heroes were these; and with glad guest-welcome they met,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And besought them to speed in their rowing a short space onward yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to fasten the hawser within the city’s haven fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Apollo the Lord of Landing they builded an altar there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the strand they upreared it, and there did the smoke of the sacrifice rise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sweet strong wine did the king’s self give them, their need to suffice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sheep therewithal: for an oracle rang in his ears⁠—“In the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a godlike band of heroes shall come, meet thou their array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With welcome of love, and thou shalt not bethink thee at all of the fray.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like unto Jason, the soft down bloomed on the young king’s chin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither yet was he gladdened with laughter of children his halls within;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the pangs of the travailing hour not yet to his bride had been known,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the lady born of Merops, Perkosius’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair-tressed Kleitê. But now had she passed from her sire’s halls forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the mainland-shore, when he won her with gifts of priceless worth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for all this left he his bridal bower and the bed of his bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And arrayed them a banquet, and cast from his heart all fear aside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they questioned each other, the king and the heroes. Of them would he learn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The end whereunto they voyaged, and Pelias’ bidding stern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the dwellers around, and their cities, they asked and were fain to be taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touching all the gulf of Propontis the wide: but the king knew nought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond to tell them, albeit with eager desire they sought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So at dawn did they climb huge Dindymus’ sides, with purpose to gaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their own eyes over the unknown sea and her trackless ways;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But forth of the outer haven first their galley they rowed;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still Jason’s Path is it named, that mountain-track they trode.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the earth-born giants the while rushed down from the mountain-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the seaward mouth they blocked of the haven of Chytos the wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With crags, like men that lie in wait for a wolf in his lair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit with them that were younger had Herakles tarried there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he leapt to his feet, and against them his back-springing bow did he strain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One after other he stretched them on earth; and the giants amain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaved up huge jagged rocks, and hurled them against their foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, for that terrible monster-brood was nurtured, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Hêrê, the bride of Zeus, for a trial of Herakles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therewithal came the rest of their fellows, returning to battle with these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ever they won the mountain-crest. To the slaughter they fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Earth-born brood, those heroes: with arrows some did they quell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some on the points of their spears they received, until they had slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that to grapple of fight had rushed so furious-fain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as when the woodmen with axes have smitten, and throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The long beams down on the strand of the sea ranged row upon row⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the brine-sodden wood shall grip the strong bolts faster so⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so at the entering-in of the foam-fringed haven they lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One after other; some in a huddled heap where the spray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dashed over their heads and their breasts, the while, stretched high on the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stiffened their limbs: there were some yet again, whose heads on the sand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rested, the while in the heaving waters swayed their feet;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But doomed were they all alike for the birds’ and the fishes’ meat.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the heroes, so soon as the peril afar from their emprise was driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast loose the hawsers of Argo before the breezes of heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forth shot she, and onward they drave, fast cleaving the broad sea-swell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All day under canvas she ran: howbeit, as twilight fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer the wind-rush steadily held, but the veering blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught them, and swept them aback, till it brought them again at the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the guest-fain Dolian men. Then stepped they ashore in the gloom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the night; and unto this day is it called the Rock of Doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round which the hawsers of Argo in blind haste now did they pass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither did any man deem that the selfsame island it was;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet were the Dolians ware that again in the night to their coast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heroes were come, but haply they weened that a Makrian host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pelasgian men for war had sailed to their land overseas:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore their armour they donned, and uplifted their hands against these.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with onset of spears and with clashing of shields met they in the strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to the vehement blast of flame which hath leapt into life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the copses dry, and the red tongues climb: and the battle-din then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearful and furious fell in the midst of the Dolian men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor may Kyzikus now overleap his weird, and aback from the war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Win home to the bower of love and the arms of his bride any more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, even as he turned on him, full on the king leapt Aison’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stabbed in the midst of his breast, and shattered was all the bone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the spear, and falling in death-throes down on the sands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He filled up the measure of Fate. To escape her resistless hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is vouchsafed unto none: as a wide snare compassed we are with her bands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so, as he weened that the bitterness now of death was past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the hands of the heroes, lo, in her gin were his feet caught fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the night, as he battled with them, and many a champion withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was slain with the king; by Herakles’ hands did Telekles fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fell Megabrontes; and Sphodris Akastus overthrew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Zelys, Gephyrus withal, the battle-swift Peleus slew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Telamon’s ashen spear through Basileus’ heart is thrust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Died Promeus by Idas, and Klytius laid Hyakinthus in dust;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Tyndarids twain slew Phlogius, slew Megalossakes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And valiant Itymoneus fell before Oineus’ son amid these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Artakes with him, a chieftain of men: and unto this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto all these slain do the people the worship of heroes pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wavered the ranks and broke; then fled they in panic affright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As before the swift-winged hawks doth a cloud of doves take flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the gates in a huddled rout they poured, and the town straightway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the war-yell was filled, and backward rolled was the woeful fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at dawn were they ware, both these and those, of the cureless ill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the ruinous error; and now did bitter anguish fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Minyan heroes, beholding before them Aineus’ child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched in the dust, and Kyzikus lying blood-defiled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For three whole days with rending of hair did they mourn his doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even they with the Dolian folk. Thereafter about his tomb</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times in their brazen armour the round of lament did they pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And buried him: funeral games held they in the selfsame place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As was meet, in the meadow-plain where yet before the eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the folk of the latter day doth the heap of his grave-mound rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, neither would Kleitê his wife any more mid the living abide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forlorn of her lord; but a woefuller evil she added beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the evil done, when clasping her neck with the noose she died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, but the Wildwood Maids made moan for the beautiful dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of all the tears that to earth from their eyes for her sake they shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fountain the Goddesses made, and the name of it far and wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath been heard, even Kleitê, the name of a most unhappy bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, that was the darkest day that from Zeus did ever befall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The daughters and sons of the Dolian race, and in none of them all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was there spirit to taste of food, and their hands for a weary while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By reason of grief hung down, and forgat the millstone’s toil:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But their lives dragged on, while untouched of the fire was the food that they ate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, the Ionian folk that in Kyzikus dwell even yet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they pour drink-offerings year by year, at the city’s mill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grind ever their corn, for the querns in the houses of mourning are still.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the wild winds woke at the sound of their mourning to shriek and to rave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve days, twelve nights; and prisoned by wrath of wind and wave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tarried the heroes from sailing, until, on the thirteenth night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the rest of the wanderers lay for the last time bowed by the might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of slumber on that drear shore, while watch and ward was kept</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Akastus and Mopsus Ampykus’ son over them that slept⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then over the golden head of Aison’s son did there fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A kingfisher: clear through the hush his happy-boding cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang for the lulling of winds; and Mopsus hearkening caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shore-bird’s note, and he knew it with happy omen fraught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a God’s hand guided its wing, that it wheeled and shot to the height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Argo’s stern, and thereon hath it stayed its arrowy flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the seer touched Jason, there on the fleeces soft as he lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sheep, and from slumber he roused him with haste, and thus did he say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aison’s son, thou must climb to the temple that standeth there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Dindymus’ rugged height, and make to the Mother thy prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fair-throned Mother of all the Blest: and the stormy blast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be stilled. For but now hath a cry by mine ears on the night-wind passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The weird sea-kingfisher’s cry; and around thy slumbering head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheeling its flight, it uttered the thing that my lips have said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For swayed by her power be the winds, and the sea, and the earth below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea also Olympus crowned with the everlasting snow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to her, when to heaven from her hills she ascendeth, doth Zeus give place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Kronos’ son himself, and all the Deathless Race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Blessèd in reverence bow before her awful face.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he: to hear that word the heart of Jason leapt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladsome he sprang from his couch, and his comrades, there as they slept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did he waken in haste; and he told, as they gathered around him to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prophecy spoken of Mopsus Ampykus’ son, the seer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then steers from the byre the young men drave, and with speed they pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up the steep hill-path with the beasts, till they won to the mountain’s crest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Rock of Doom did others the hawsers of Argo slip:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Thracian haven they rowed, and leapt to the strand; and the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There guarded they left, for there tarried behind of their fellows a few.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from Dindymus saw they the Makrian cliffs, and full in view</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The stretch of the Thracian Coast oversea on this side lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Bosporus misty-dim, and the blue hills far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mysia-land, and the river Aisêpus on that side flowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the town and the plain Nepeian of Adresteia showed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then found they the sturdy stock of a vine in the forest that grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tree exceeding old: with the axes the same did they hew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Mountain-goddess’s sacred image: with cunning skill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the craftsman did Argus carve it; and so on the rugged hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did they set it up: for the shrine thereof stood tall oaks round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which of all trees root them the deepest beneath the face of the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then of loose stones built they an altar: with leaves from the oaken spray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wreathed it around, and the sacrifice thereupon did they lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Mother majestic, on Dindymê’s Queen, the while did they call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who dwelleth in Phrygia: on Tityas they cried, on Kyllênê withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who alone be called the Dispensers of Doom⁠—by the judgment-seat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Mother Idaean who sit⁠—by all that priesthood of Crete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Daktylians of Ida, born in the cave Dictaean of yore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Nymph Anchialê clutched in the throes of travail, and tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the fingers of either hand the earth by Oaxus’ shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knelt Aison’s son to the Goddess, and prayed her with earnest cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To turn the tempest away, on the flame of the sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he poured the wine. And the youths therewithal at Orpheus’ command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trode round her altar the measure, an armour-sheathèd band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clashed with their swords on their shields, that the sound that boded them ill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might be lost in the air, the wail for the dead, which the people still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In grief for their king sent up; for which cause unto this day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With timbrel and drum the Phrygians worship to Rhea pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Goddess of them that sought her was found, and inclined her ear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sacrifice-prayer: of her grace did tokens of good appear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the trees shed fruit in abundance down, and around their feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth mid her tender grass with flowers unsown was sweet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the beasts of the wildwood came, forsaking thicket and lair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fawning with swaying tails: and another marvel there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did the Goddess create, for that Dindymus never theretofore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With watersprings flowed; but now did a sudden torrent pour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her thirsty crest, and the Fountain of Jason they name it still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The folk that in after days dwell round that sacred hill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Goddess’s honour a feast on the Bears’ Hill then dight they,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rhea the all-majestic they hymned: but at dawn of the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stilled were the winds, and with oars from the island sped they away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then hero was kindled with hero in gallant contention to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who last should be spent and refrain; for the peace of a windless sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid level the swirls of the sea, and lulled to sleep the wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And putting their trust in the calm, ever onward and onward they drave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship by their might; and with her, through the brine as she darted and leapt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not even the storm-footed steeds of Poseidon the pace had kept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit the surges awoke as from sleep, as the keen blasts blew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which swooped from the river-gorges as day to the evenfall drew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the heroes forspent with toiling refrained, save only one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who by might of his hands tugged onward his weary comrades alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Herakles: quivered the strong-knit beams as he strained to the stroke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when, as they fled by the mainland-shore of the Mysian folk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Rhyndakus’ outfall they sighted, and, huge against the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aigaion’s cairn, past Phrygia a little, and slipped thereby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then, through the furrows of roughened surge as he tugged and tore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snapped he the ashen blade, and, grasping the half of the oar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in his hands, back Herakles fell, and the half swept down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tossing wake of the ship. But he rose, and with angry frown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat gazing around, for his hands endured not idle to lie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>’Twas the hour when the delver or ploughman aback from the field doth hie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy to his hut, and his soul sore craveth the eventide meat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bow on the threshold his knees, and totter his weary feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All dust-besprent he beholdeth his cramped hands worn with toil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many a curse reviling the taskmaster Belly the while⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came they to where in the land Kianian nestle her homes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath Arganthônê, where Kios against the sea-tide foams.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then as friends greet friends did the Mysians with kindly welcoming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meet them, the people that dwelt in the land, and gifts did they bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even sheep, and wine without stint therewithal gave they for their need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sapless logs did some of them gather, and grass from the mead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did some bring in, whereof great store for their couches they mowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The while in the hands of some the whirling fire-sticks glowed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some mingled the wine in the mazer, and ready the feast they dight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doing sacrifice to Apollo as deepened the shades of night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Zeus’ son spake to his comrades meetly the feast to prepare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But into the forest himself hath hied, to the end that there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ever he supped, for the grip of his hands he might fashion an oar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then found he a pine as he roved, and scant was the burden it bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of boughs, nor with heavy-clustering leaves was its shade made dim;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But like to the shaft it rose of a poplar tall and slim:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even such was the measure thereof to behold in height and in girth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly his arrow-fraught quiver hath Herakles cast to the earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the shafts therein: from his shoulders the lion’s hide did he strip.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his brass-heavy club at its roots he smote, till he loosed earth’s grip.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low down did he grasp the stem about with either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Putting trust in his might: with shoulder against it thrust did he stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With feet wide set. From the ground, deep-rooted albeit it grew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath his grip upheaved it with all the clods that clave thereto.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when unawares the mast of a ship, in the very hour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Orion’s storm-fraught setting is working in baleful power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is struck from on high by a tempest’s swiftly-swooping squall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with snapped stays rent from its box, and the wedges therewithal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so he upwrenched that tree; and he gathered up arrows and bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the lion’s hide, and his club; and he hasted him backward to go.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Hylas the while with a pitcher of brass from the throng hath hied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking a spring’s pure flow; for the feast of the eventide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To draw for him water against his return, and withal to prepare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With speed all things for the time when again his lord should be there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in suchlike service did Herakles nurture the lad and train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the day when, a captive child, by the hero’s hand he was ta’en</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the home of his father Theodamas, slain in Dryopian land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without ruth, when he dared for his ploughteam’s sake ’gainst the hero to stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it fell, as Theodamas clave with the share the fallow field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mischief befell him; for Herakles came, and he bade him to yield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heifer he ploughed withal unto him in his heart’s despite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For against the Dryopian folk was he seeking occasion of fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their bane, forasmuch as reckless of right in the land dwelt they:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the story thereof should lead me far from my song astray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in haste to the fountain he hied him, and Pegae hight that spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the people that dwell in the field thereabout: and the dancing-ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Nymphs, as it chanced, was there; for all these loved full well⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even all the Nymphs that about that fair hill wont to dwell⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hymns through the night-tide ringing to chant unto Artemis still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they which inherit the mountain-crest, or the rushing rill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Forest-haunters, were ranged from the fountain far away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it fell that the Water-nymph came floating up that day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the depths of the fair-flowing spring:⁠—lo, over her bendeth his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rosy flush of its beauty, its manifold winsome grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the full moon casting her beams from the height of the firmament</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smote him, and faintness of love on her soul the Cyprian sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scarce she unravelled her thoughts in sweet confusion blent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But over the fountain’s brim as aforetime aslant hath he bowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plunged in the ripple the pitcher: the water gurgled loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As into the echoing brass it poured; and the Fountain-maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her left arm slid from the depths, and around his neck was it laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her yearning to kiss those dainty lips, while, clutched by her right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn down was his arm, and through swirling eddies he sank from the light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But his cry as he sank was heard of one of his comrades alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who trod that fountainward path, Polyphemus, Eilatus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet that giant hero when back he should fare to the feast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Pegae, following the cry, hath he rushed, like a wildwood beast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto whom from far away hath been wafted the bleating of sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with famine afire he pursueth; howbeit he may not leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the prey, for already the shepherds have penned them safe from the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in vehement rage must he moan and howl, till aweary he grow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Eilatus’ son made vehement moan, and he roamed to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About the place; and his voice rang piteous, broken with woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then suddenly drew he his mighty blade, and he rushed to pursue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If perchance he were seized of beasts, or from ambush a robber-crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had leapt on him faring alone, and were haling afar their prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, even as he shook in his hand his naked sword, in the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came Herakles’ self to meet him, a giant form that sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ship through the gloom; and he knew him, and straightway a tale most dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He told, while laboured with heavy panting his heart, and he said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“God help thee, that I first bring to thee tidings of bitter pain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hylas hath gone to the spring, and returned not alive again!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or robbers have seized him, and hale him away to captivity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or evil beasts are rending:⁠—I heard but now his cry.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon Herakles’ temples then did the great sweat-gouts upstart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he heard him speak, and the dark blood curdled about his heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fury he flung to the earth the pine, and along that path</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed, whithersoever his feet might hurry his aimless wrath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as, stung by a gadfly, a bull rusheth onward frenzy-stirred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forsaking the meadows and marshlands, the while of herdsman or herd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He taketh no heed, pressing on in his wild course now without check,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now making a moment’s stand, and uplifting his massive neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He uttereth bellowings, mad with the sting of the cruel breese;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he in his frenzy now would be plying his strong swift knees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unresting, and now from his toil would he cease for a moment’s space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shouted:⁠—the mighty voice rang far through the lonely place.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Eftsoons the morning-star rose over the mountain’s crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the winds swept down from the gorges; and Tiphys cried on the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To get them aboard in haste, and to hearken the wind’s behest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So with eager speed they embarked, and the anchor-stones of the ship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaved they aboard, and the hawsers thereof in haste did they slip.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the midst of the sail bellied out with the blast, and far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sea-strand with joy by Poseidon’s foreland wafted were they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it fell, in the hour when the dawn glad-eyed from the heaven doth beam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the east uprising, and all the earth-ways clearer gleam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dewy wolds are a-sparkle beneath her flashing sheen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then were they ware of those that forsaken unwares had been.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then mighty contention arose, and an indignation-burst</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most vehement-fierce, that any should go, and forsake the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their comrades in prowess. But Aison’s son distraught with amaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake never a word or bad or good in their evil case;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But devouring his soul he sat ’neath wilderment’s heavy load.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Telamon’s wrath waxed hot, and thus with the prince he chode:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ha! sit thou there at thine ease!⁠—good sooth, for thy profit was this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Herakles thus should be left; thou givest no counsel, I wis,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest haply his glory in Hellas should overshadow thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the Gods peradventure vouchsafe us the home-return to see!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What pleasure in words?⁠—I will go, I only, with none of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy comrades, who plotted with thee this treason to Herakles.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and on Tiphys Hagnias’ son he rushed, and his ire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleamed through his eyes as the leaping flame of the ravening fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now to the land of the Mysian men had they won back again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In despite of the driving surge, and the head-wind’s ceaseless strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the two winged sons of Thracian Boreas rose thereupon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with fierce stern words from his purpose withheld they Aiakus’ son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhappy they!⁠—grim vengeance thereafter did Herakles wreak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon these who withheld the rest which were fain for the lost to seek.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when from the games over Pelias dead they were wending again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeward, in Tenos the sea-girt he slew them; and heaped o’er the slain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth, and above that grave-mound reared he pillars twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one whereof, a marvel exceeding for men to behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sways to and fro in the blast when the North-wind whistleth cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay, so in the after-time these things were ordained to be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now did Glaukus appear unto them from the depths of the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The servant of Nereus divine, the far-discerning seer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High out of the waves his shaggy head and his breast did he rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the waist, and his brawny hand did the God stretch out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the keel of the ship, and unto her eager crew did he shout:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wherefore be ye thus purposed against great Zeus’ decrees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Aiêtes’ city to bring bold Herakles?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, this is his weird⁠—in the land of Argos labouring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To accomplish toils full twelve for Eurystheus the tyrannous king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to dwell with the Deathless Ones, if he bring to fulfilment yet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A few more toils: grieve ye not therefore with vain regret.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polyphemus’ weird likewise is to rear, where Kios doth fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the sea, ’mid the Mysians a glorious city’s wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to find in the Chalybes’ land the doom that endeth all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Hylas a Goddess-nymph of her love for her spouse hath taken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whose sake wandered away those twain unawares forsaken.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then downward he plunged, and he wrapped him about with the waves white-wreathing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And around him the darkling water foamed in eddies seething.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he loosed from his hand the hollow ship through the brine to flee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the heroes were glad: then rose up Telamon hastily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Aiakus’ son unto Jason strode, and his hand did he take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the compassing grasp of his own, and embraced him, and thus he spake:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be nowise wroth with me, Aison’s son, if folly-distraught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have sinned in mine ignorance: anguish exceeding upon me hath wrought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To utter an arrogant word which I could not refrain: let us cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the winds my transgression, and knit be our hearts as in days overpast.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Answered him Aison’s son, and in courteous wise spake he:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah, friend, of a truth ’twas a bitter word that thou spakest to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou saidst in the midst of us all that a traitor I was unto him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who to me was a friend!⁠—yet I will not nurse wrath brooding grim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though vexed was my soul at the first; since not as for flocks of sheep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst thou chafe and wast wroth, nor for hoarded wealth of a treasure-heap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all for a comrade’s sake. I were fain thou wouldst champion so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even me, if need should be ever, against another foe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and they sat them down, as in days overpast made one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But their lost⁠—by the counsel of Zeus, Polyphemus Eilatus’ son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was doomed mid the Mysian men to build a city, to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The name of the river thereby: but aback must Herakles fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Eurystheus’ labours to toil. But he threatened in anger hot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To waste the Mysian land, if her folk for him found not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What doom upon Hylas had lighted, if dead or alive he were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pledges they gave for the lost, in that sons most noble and fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their people they chose, and for hostages gave, and an oath they swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they would not refrain from the toil of the search for evermore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore for tidings of Hylas the Kians unto this day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Theiodamas’ son, of the stranger inquire: the warders aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guard Trêchis the fair-built; for there did the hero cause to abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons that they sent for their ransom to turn his fury aside.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And the wind all day bare onward the galley and all night through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a fresh strong blast: but when dawning arose, the breath of it blew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No whit any more; and they spied jutting forth from a curve of the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A foreland, and broad to behold that dark height swelled from the strand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they bent to the oars, and at sunrise the keel up-furrowed the sand.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
