<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There were there steadings of cattle, and Amykus’ farms were there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud king of Bebrykian men, whom erst a wood-nymph bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Bithynian Meliê couched with Poseidon the Lord of Birth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overweening was this their son above all the children of Earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who even on wayfaring strangers his tyrannous ordinance laid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they should not depart from his land till that trial of prowess were made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against him with the fist: and neighbours full many he smote that they died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now to the galley he came; but he scorned in the height of his pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To inquire of them wherefore they voyaged, or ask what men were they:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with sudden defiance he challenged them all, and thus did he say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sea-rovers, hearken the thing that is meet and right ye should know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the ordinance⁠—none may depart, from my country to go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even none who hath come to Bebrykia’s folk out of alien lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ever against mine hands he hath lifted in battle his hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose for you therefore the mightiest man of all your array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set ye him here for the strife of the fist against me this day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But and if ye shall shrink from the trial, and trample my laws underfoot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Verily mighty constraint shall pursue you with bitter pursuit.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he in pride overweening, and came upon them as they heard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce anger, but most by his threatening vaunt Polydeukes was stirred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway he stood for his fellows’ champion forth, and he cried:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Peace!⁠—threaten not us, whatsoever the name that hath puffed thee with pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With brutal mishandling:⁠—yea, unto these thy laws will we bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even I right willingly offer me⁠—lo, I will meet thee now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Roundly he spake; and with rolling eyes glared on him the king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a lion javelin-smitten, when out on the mountains the ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the hunters hemmeth him round; but, albeit encompassed about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the throng, he heedeth them not, but his glance ever searcheth him out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him only, which wounded him first, yet quelled him not with the stroke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Tyndareus’ son laid by his goodly-woven cloak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of delicate threads, a gift of remembrance for sweet days past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a daughter of Lemnos. His mantle’s dark folds Amykus cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the clasps thereof, to the ground, and the shepherd’s staff that he bore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rugged olive his hand from the windy hill-slope tore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then looked they, and chose for the combat a spot that was good in their sight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all their companions they bade sit down to left and to right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then stood they forth, nor in form nor in stature alike to behold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the one might be seed of Typhôeus the fell, or a monster of old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ay, even as one of the giant brood of Earth, which she bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wreak upon Zeus her wrath: but Tyndareus’ son showed fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the star of the heaven, whose loveliest beams through the fading blue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shine in the eventide, when the wings of the night drop dew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even such was the child of Zeus, and the soft down bloomed on his chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bright were his dancing eyes: but waxed his breast within</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fury and might like a wild beast’s rage; and he struck out fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his hands, making trial if swift were their play, as in days overpast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uncramped by the stress of toil and the strain of the weary oar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Amykus proved not his limbs, but he glared on his foe evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing in silence aloof, and he yearned in eager mood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To smite and bespatter the hero’s breast with the spurting blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And between them Lykôreus, Amykus’ henchman, cast on the ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In front of their feet the fighting-gauntlets with thongs overbound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strips of the raw hide, dry, all ridged with wrinkles were they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then unto the hero the giant with arrogant words ’gan say:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Whichsoever thou wilt, lo, freely and willingly grant I to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without casting of lots, that thou mayst not hereafter murmur at me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now bind them about thine hands: thou shalt learn, and to others shall tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How featly I carve the tough bull-hides, how passing well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wield them withal, to bedabble with blood the jaws of men.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, but the hero scorned with wrangling to answer again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he made no ado, but the pair lying nighest his feet, the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightly smiling he took. Then unto him Kastor came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Talaus the mighty, the scion of Bias: they bound on his wrists</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gauntlets in haste, oft bidding him play the man in the lists.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to Amykus Ornytus came and Arêtus; but naught knew they⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fools!⁠—that they girded a doomed man then for his latest fray.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when they were ready, and forth in the lists stood face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway in front of their bodies their brawny hands did they raise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then closed they, and matched their might in the grim play furiously.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the Bebrykian king, as a charging wave of the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With storm-roughened crest overarcheth a ship, and would surely o’erwhelm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that scantly she ’scapeth by wisdom of him that swayeth the helm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When over her bulwark to hurl itself mad is the surge of the wave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So followed he hard upon Tyndareus’ son to daunt him: he gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No respite. The hero by cunning keeping him scatheless aye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baffled his every rush: well marked he his brutal play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wot if the giant in might were haply resistless, or no.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So ever he faced him and warded, and flashed back blow for blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as when the shipwrights with hammers mightily swinging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smite on the beams of a galley, driving the clamps close-clinging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharply together, that bang upon clang cometh crashing and ringing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the air is a-shiver; so crack ’neath the buffets the cheeks of the twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So crash their jaws, and so clatter their teeth as the swift blows rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor flinch they nor falter, but facing each other smite they amain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till spent are they both, and for laboured panting they needs must refrain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then standing apart for a little they wiped from their foreheads away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The streaming sweat, while their deep chests heaved with the toil of the fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then each against other again they rushed, as when on the lea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two bulls for a heifer are fighting in fury of rivalry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then mid their battle did Amykus up to his full height spring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an ox-slayer straining a-tiptoe⁠—downward the weight did he swing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his gauntleted hand on the hero; but swerving swift from the stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a turn of his head hath he foiled him, hath caught on his shoulder and broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its force⁠—he hath slipped past the knee of the giant his knee⁠—he hath rushed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his whole weight dashing his fist ’neath his ear, and the bones hath he crushed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That for agony down on his knees he sank, and the Minyans’ shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang; and with one great gasp was the giant’s life poured out.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Uprose the Bebrykian men to avenge the wild king’s fall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full upon Polydeukes as one man rushed they all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rugged clubs and with javelins tossing in furious hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his comrades afront of him closed, and they drew their keen-whetted brands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of their scabbards: and Kastor the first with the sword-sweep cleft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The head of a foe, as against him he rushed; and to right and to left</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon either shoulder aslant did the ghastly halves of it fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polydeukes o’erthrew the giant Itymoneus, Mimas withal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, weaponless, one with a sudden leap did he spurn on the breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his foot, and in dust he fell; and one, as to conflict he pressed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the left brow smote he with swift right hand, and he tare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eyelid away, that it left the wretch’s eyeball bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Oreides, Amykus’ henchman, a brawny champion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stabbed with his lance at the flank of Talaus, Bias’ son;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit he slew him not, but sliding along the skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brass sped under his belt, neither tasted the flesh within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arêtus at Iphitus smote with a club of the knotted oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Eurytus’ scion, the battle-bider, reeled from the stroke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit not yet was the hero doomed unto deadly bane;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, soon was the smiter’s self by Klytius’ sword to be slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did Ankaius the dauntless son of Lykurgus in haste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swing up his mighty axe, and around his left arm cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bear’s dark fell for a shield, and amidst the Bebrykian array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fury of onset he plunged, and beside him charged to the fray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiakus’ sons, and Jason the valiant leapt to the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when mid the folds the grey wolves scare in huddled affright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vast throngs of sheep on a wintry day, having rushed on the pen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the keen-nosed dogs unscented, unmarked of the shepherd’s ken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in fury they seek to leap the fence, and to seize the prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glaring and glaring, a fierce-eyed ring; and, shrinking away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon every side, on each other trample the sheep; even so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drave they in ghastly rout the haughty Bebrykian foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when bee-keepers or shepherds fill with the stifling smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cleft of a rock where dwell the honey-fashioning folk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bees for a while all thronging within their cavern-home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmur with muffled hum, till, driven at last therefrom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the murky fume, they pour from the crag, and they flee away;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so not long they abode, but scattered in disarray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through Bebrykia bearing the tidings of Amykus’ doom did they fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fools!⁠—nothing they knew of another woe even then drawn nigh</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All unforeseen, for their orchards were wasted in that same hour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And amidst of their hamlets did Lykus’ ravening spears devour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Mariandynians slew, forasmuch as their king was afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that aye for the iron-bearing land were the nations at war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now had the spoilers fallen on garth and byre and fold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While seaward the heroes headed their sheep in throngs untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this one to that one cried the while they drave the prey:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bethink ye, what price had they paid for their felon folly to-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If haply a God had but brought our Herakles hither to aid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ha! surely had he but been here, no trial, I ween, had been made</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of strife with the fists; but so soon as the caitiff drew nigh to proclaim</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ordinance, straightway the club should have made him forget the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even as he spake it, yea, and forget the might of his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, but we left him, we left him, alone on a desolate strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we sailed away oversea:⁠—full soon shall we know, each one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our baneful folly, seeing our mightiest champion is gone!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the counsels of Zeus had wrought all this, beyond their ken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So here through the night they abode, and the hurts of the wounded men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They tended, and slew to the Gods everlasting the sacrifice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a mighty supper they dight: fell sleep upon no man’s eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the bowl as they sat and the blazing altar the long night through,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their golden locks enwreathed with the leaves of a bay that grew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard by the strand, about whose stem was their hawser bound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to Orpheus’ lyre they chanted; their voices’ blended sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rang tunefully: all the breathless beach lay tranced with the spell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the song; for of Zeus of Therapnae’s child did the sweet hymn tell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Over the dusky hills did the light of the new sun leap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he rose from his far sea-bourn, as he roused the shepherds from sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then from the stem of the bay did the heroes their hawser uncoil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they laid in the galley so much as sufficed for their need of the spoil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And before the breeze up swirling Bosporus’ flood they steered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There steep and high the surge, as a mountain’s crown upreared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afront of the prow, rusheth on them as leapeth a beast on the prey⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Higher, still higher upheaved to the clouds: thou wouldst verily say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“They cannot escape grim doom, for that full o’er the galley’s side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swingeth its madding crest like a cloud!” Yet a bark may ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe even o’er such, if she have but a helmsman good at need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by Tiphys’ steering-craft even so did the heroes speed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the peril unscathed, yet sore dismayed. So the wild day passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the night; and with dawn on Bithynia’s shore the anchor they cast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There hard by the sea had Phineus Agênor’s son his abode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who endured above all men trouble and anguish, a baleful load.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a spirit of prophecy Lêto’s son had bestowed of old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On him; yet he thrust all reverence aside, and to mortals foretold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred purpose of Zeus, the mind of Heaven’s King.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore did Zeus requite him with eld long-lingering;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he took from his eyes the pleasant light, and he suffered him not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have joy of the meats untold which the dwellers around aye brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time to his halls they resorted the purpose of heaven to hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But out of their caverns of cloud ever suddenly swooping anear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Harpies would snatch them away from his lips and his hands evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their talons, and whiles was there left unto him of all that store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No whit, and whiles but a crumb, that for torment his life might be spared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they poured over all a loathly stench: was none that dared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I say not, to carry thereof to his mouth, but even to stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off, so foully the remnants reeked of the banquet banned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, on his ears as their voices and tramp of their coming brake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew that the men were at hand whereof Zeus’ oracle spake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That their coming should bring for him respite, in peace to eat his bread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he rose from his couch, as a shadowy dream might rise from a bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowed over his staff, and with wrinkled feet ’gan creep to the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Groping along the walls; and for helplessness trembled sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for age his limbs as he moved, and with filth was his parchèd skin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All leprous, and nought save this enwrapped the bones within.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So forth of the hall he came, and he bowed on the threshold-stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His weary knees; and a swoon, like a dark pall over him thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enshrouded him; under his feet him seemed that the earth reeled round;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he lay in a strengthless trance, and his lips could frame no sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the heroes beheld him, and round about in a throng they pressed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And marvelled; until at the last the man from the depth of his breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew laboured and difficult breath, and uttered his prophecy:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hearken, ye noblest of Hellas’ sons, if ye verily be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The self-same heroes that Jason leadeth forth on the Quest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Golden Fleece in Argo the ship at a King’s grim hest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a surety ye be: my soul hath knowledge of everything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By her divination yet. Thanks therefore to thee, O King,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Son of Lêto, I render from depths of affliction and woe!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O friends, by the Suppliants’ Zeus, who is ever the sternest foe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of transgressors⁠—for Phœbus’ sake, and in awful Hêrê’s name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I beseech⁠—by the Gods I implore you in whose care hither ye came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help me: deliver from anguish a most ill-fated man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither hasten away uncaring and leave me in bale and ban,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ye find me: for not on mine eyes alone hath the fierce foot trode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Vengeance-fiend, and I drag to the end eld’s weary load;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a curse more bitter than all still hangeth over mine head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Harpies are wont evermore to snatch from my lips my bread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swooping adown from a den of destruction, a viewless lair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither find I any device for mine help: nay, easier it were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To escape the ken of mine own heart’s thoughts when I crave to be fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than theirs; so swift through the welkin on hovering wings are they sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if haply ever they leave but a morsel of meat on my board,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It reeketh with most unendurable strength of a stench abhorred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man, no, not for an instant, might dare draw nigh to the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not though in his breast were a heart forged all of adamant frame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But me of a surety doth hard compelling of hunger constrain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To abide, and abiding to stay this famine’s gnawing pain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But those my tormentors, an oracle saith, shall be made to flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Boreas’ sons; neither strangers shall my deliverers be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If indeed I be Phineus, renowned among men in the days long gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my wealth and my soothsaying lore, if Agênor called me son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the sister of these, Kleopatra, when over the Thracians I reigned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to mine halls, a bride by a royal bride-price gained.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So ended Agênor’s son, and compassion’s o’ermastering pain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled all the heroes, but chiefly the North-wind’s scions twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brushing the tears from their eyes they drew nigh him, and Zethes spake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hand of the grief-worn sire in his hand with the word did he take:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O hapless, none other is more afflicted than thou, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among men!⁠—ah, wherefore on thee is there heaped such a burden of woe?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baleful in sooth was the folly wherewith through thy prophecy-lore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against Gods thou transgressedst: for this was their anger exceeding sore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Howbeit our spirit within us, although we be fain, is afraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To help thee, if on us indeed a God this honour hath laid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to dwellers on Earth the rebukes of Immortals be plain to discern;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we dare not chase yon Harpies from thee, howsoever we yearn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thine help, in the hour of their coming, except thou swear to us first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That for this we shall lose not the high Gods’ favour, as men accurst.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he: the stricken in years uplifted and opened wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sightless eyes straightway, and with swift words Phineus replied:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hush!⁠—thrust not such thoughts, my son, on a spirit affliction-filled!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be witness Latona’s son, who taught to me gracious-willed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prophecy-lore; and be witness this mine ill-starred doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this dark cloud on mine eyes, and the Gods of the Underworld Gloom⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May their curse, if I die with a lie on my tongue, be upon me for aye!⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That on you no wrath of the Gods shall descend for your help this day.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then by the oath were they kindled to help him, and fled their fears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the young men straightway made ready the meat for the stricken in years⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last ordained for the Harpies’ spoil⁠—and anigh to him stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those twain, to smite with the sword those fiends when they swooped on the food.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then first his hands on the meats did he lay, that grey-haired sire:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sudden as bitter blasts, or as flashes of levin-fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unawares from the clouds they had darted, and swooping adown they yelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their awful scream, fierce-eager for prey; but the heroes beheld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shouted amidst of their onrush. The fiends at the challenge of war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift ravined the meats from the boards, and over the sea afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soared they away, but there did their foul sick stench remain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then straightway hard on their track did the North-wind’s scions twain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifting their swords follow after them fast, for with tireless might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zeus filled them: howbeit they had not prevailed to follow their flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with Zeus’s help, for that faster than Zephyrus’ blasts they darted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evermore, when on Phineus they swooped, and whene’er from the wretch they departed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when on the mountain-ridges keen hounds cunning in chase</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the track of the hornèd goats or the deer hard-following race</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly, and ever a little behind the prey as they strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snap at the haunch of the quarry, and clash their teeth in vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Zetes and Kalaïs rushed ever nearer with eager grip,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clutched at them, smote at them, missed but by sword-point or finger-tip.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, even despite Heaven’s will had they rent them limb from limb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overtaking them far away where the Floating Islands swim⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Iris the Storm-foot beheld them, and downward she plunged from the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through a whirlwind of air, and with words of restraining aloud did she cry:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sons of the North-wind, forefended it is that ye smite with the sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Harpies, great Zeus’s hounds; but myself will pronounce the word</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the oath that shall hold them from lighting again on the ancient’s board.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then spake she the words of the Oath of the Styx, the oath most dread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto all the Gods, whose reverence guardeth the words once said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the Harpies should never thereafter draw nigh unto Phineus’ hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the home of Agênor’s son, for so was it doomed to befall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the oath then yielded the heroes, and backward they turned their flight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the ship; and the Strophads, the Isles of Return, were they hight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefrom, which of old the Floating Isles had been called of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Harpies and Iris parted, and into their cavern-den</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Krêtê, the land of Minos, they plunged: but Olympus-ward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uplifted ’twixt heaven and earth on her swift wings Iris soared.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the heroes bathed and anointed the skin all fouled and sere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the ancient the while; and the choice of the fatlings they slew for their cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the flock which they bare away of the spoil of Amykus dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when in the halls a plenteous eventide-feast they had spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They feasted; and Phineus amidst them was like unto them that dream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from ravenous hunger he cheered his heart, so strange did it seem.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So there, when with meats and with wine they had satisfied all their need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the long night kept they vigil, and waited for Boreas’ seed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the ancient sat in their midst in the ruddy glow of the fire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he told of their voyaging’s bourn, and the end of their desire:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Give ear unto me:⁠—forefended it is that ye hear all through</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your fate:⁠—whatsoe’er seemeth good to the Gods I will hide not from you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mad was I of yore, when I spake unto Earth’s sons Zeus’s will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all points unto the end: for this is his pleasure still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reveal unto men his oracles short of the fulness of doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so they may lean on the Gods, and faith and prayer have room.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Rocks Kyanean first, when that gotten ye are from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the place where the two seas meet, the Dark Blue Crags, shall ye see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through that dread pass no pilot, I ween, hath prevailed to go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For rooted they are not to earth on foundations of rock therebelow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with rush and recoil unceasingly each against other they clash:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High over them archeth the crested brine, and the foam-feathers flash</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the seething cauldron: the precipice-foreland thundereth aye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore to this my counsel give good heed, and obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If indeed with prudent soul and with fear of the Gods on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye essay this Quest, that by doom self-sought ye may not die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the fool, nor in rashness of youth essay to rush thereby.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First with a bird, with a white-winged dove, shall ye make assay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speeding her flight from the ship’s prow. If she shall win her way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safe ’twixt the Crags of Terror, and out to the open sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer thereafter from daring the selfsame path shrink ye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But grip ye the oars in your hands, and put forth your uttermost might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleaving the gorge of the sea, for that safety’s deliverance-light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not be in prayer so much as the strength of your hands and the strain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore let all else be, and toil ye with might and main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boldly: but ere then pray as ye list; I say not nay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But and if the death-trap clutch in the midst the dove, and slay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sail ye aback; for better by far it is that ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should yield to the Deathless. The evil fate should ye nowise flee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Rocks⁠—no, not though fashioned of iron your Argo should be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O wretches, dare not to transgress the warning my tongue hath given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thrice so much ye account me abhorred of the Dwellers in Heaven⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, though it were more than thrice⁠—as I am by my grievous sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet dare not to flout the omen, to thrust your galley therein!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these things shall fall as they haply shall fall. But if scatheless ye shun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rush of the Clashing Rocks, and the Pontus Sea shall be won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sailing therefrom, the Bithynians’ land to your right shall ye keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever heedfully standing out from the reefs, until ye shall sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round the outfall of swift-flowing Rheba, and round the headland dark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And within the haven of Thynê’s isle shall anchor your bark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence turn ye aback for a little space o’er the long sea-swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till ye beach your keel on the strand where the Mariandynians dwell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereby is a path through darkness descending to Hades’ hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Cape Acherusian towereth upward, a giant wall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swirling Acheron cleaving the mountain’s heart unseen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly poureth forth his flood from a mighty ravine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereby many column-hills of the Paphlagonian shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall ye pass, the nation whose king was in Enetê born of yore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Pelops; and yet do they boast them sprung from his princely line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a headland there is, looking full where the circling Bear doth shine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A crag exceeding steep, and Karambis it hath to name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blasts of the North-wind are sundered about the crest of the same,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sheer doth it spring from the sea, so sharply it cleaveth the air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now when ye have rounded the same, lo, stretcheth before you there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A great beach: far at the end of the gleaming strand’s long sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath a jutting foreland the waters of Halys seaward leap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Terribly roaring; and hard thereby doth Iris go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lesser river, whose swirls soft-rippling gently flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And onward from thence is the bend of a huge cape towering high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up from the land, and the mouth of the river Thermodon thereby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the height Themiskyrian watcheth the sleeping bay at its side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cometh murmuring still of her journeyings over the mainland wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is the plain of Doias, the cities three rise near</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Amazon Maids: then they whose lot is of all most drear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Chalybes, dwell in a rugged land on a stubborn soil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smithying-craftsmen; in forging of iron ever they toil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anigh to them dwell Tibarenians, lords of many sheep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past Zeus the Defender of Strangers, the fane upon Genetê’s steep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And next unto these, on their marches, the Mossynœcians dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a land of forests, in many a mountain-cradled dell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose homes be in towers of timber, fashioned and carven well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But coast past these, and beach your keel on a smooth isle: there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat back with your uttermost cunning the ravening scourge of the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those birds, which in countless multitudes haunt, men say, the strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the desolate isle;⁠—therein doth a temple of Arês stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stone, which was built by the queens of the Amazon war-array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Otrêrê and Antiopê, what time they marched to the fray;⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there shall a help for your need from the bitter sea arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unlooked-for: wherefore, abide there, with kindly intent I advise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now what do I, transgressing again?⁠—what need that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should tell to you every whit of the tale of my prophecy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward away from the isle, on the mainland shore’s far side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Philyrans dwell, and beyond the Philyran folk abide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Makrônes, and next, the Becheirian tribes, a host untold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next after these the Sapeirians’ land shall your eyes behold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next these the Bezyrans, their neighbours, dwell; and beyond, at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even the warrior Kolchians: yet shall ye speed on past</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your galley, till stayed at the uttermost bourn of the sea ye are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There over the mainland Kytaian, from Amaranth mountains afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over the plain Kirkaian rolling evermore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His broad flood into the sea doth eddying Phasis pour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the selfsame river’s mouth your galley bring:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then on the towers shall ye look of Kytaian Aiêtes the king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the War-god’s grove dim-shadowed. And high on a dark oak-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hangeth the Fleece; and a dragon, a monster fearful to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever glareth around, keeping watch and ward: never dawn doth arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither darkness descendeth, when sweet sleep quelleth his ruthless eyes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even so did he speak: straightway as they heard were they thrilled with fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long speechless they sat, till brake at the last that silence drear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aison’s son, sore wildered that boding of evil to hear:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O ancient, now hast thou come to the bourn of the toils we must know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sea, and hast told us the token, by trust wherein we may go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the baleful rocks, and win unto Pontus: but if once more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If through these we escape, we shall homeward return unto Hellas’ shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exceeding fain were I this also to learn of thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How shall I do?⁠—how track such a measureless path o’er the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who am but a youth, and with youths?⁠—and behold, this Kolchian land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the ends of the earth doth lie, on the great sea’s uttermost strand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So did he cry; but answered the ancient, and spake yet again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My son, when once thou hast safely fled through the Rocks of Bane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear not, for a God shall show thee another voyaging-track</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Aia: yea, after Aia guides shalt thou nowise lack.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, friends, of the guileful aid of the Cyprian Queen take thought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For of her unto glorious issues shall all your toils be wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now of the things yet lying beyond these ask me nought.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So answered Agênor’s son; and lo, those twain stood nigh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of the Thracian North-wind, swooping adown from the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the threshold their swift feet set they; and straight from his carven chair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each hero upsprang, beholding the champions suddenly there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eager for tidings were they; and Zetes, still as he drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard breath from the toil of the hunting, told them how far they flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chasing them, told how Iris restrained them at point to slay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the oaths which the Goddess gave of her grace; how in sore dismay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath Dictê’s cliff in a cavern vast they had plunged out of sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then were the heroes all in the mansion filled with delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the tidings, and Phineus withal. Then spake unto him straightway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aison’s son, and with love overflowing his soul ’gan say:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Of a surety a God, O Phineus, there was, in compassion that bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look on thy grievous affliction, and us from afar he sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither, that Boreas’ sons might drive thy tormentors from thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now if he would give but light to thine eyes, such gladness in me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would stir, as though with the Fleece I were come to mine home, I trow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, but the head of the ancient sank, and he answered low:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay, Aison’s son, it is past recall: no dawn shall arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balm-breathing on them, for blasted are these my sightless eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, death let a God bestow right speedily, rather than this:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, when I am dead, shall I enter at last into perfect bliss.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake they, and each unto other the answering speech returned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And amidst of their converse in no long space the dawn-flush burned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Child of the Mist: then gathered the neighbours to Phineus’ door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in time past day by day wont thither to come evermore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, despite the curse, from their own a portion of meat each brought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to all did the ancient⁠—yea, to the poor whose hands bare nought⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak kindly his oracles; yea, from afflictions many he freed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his soothsaying: wherefore they came, and they ministered unto his need.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And came with the rest Paraibius, he that was dearest of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto him, and with joy was he ware of the presences thronging the hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the ancient to him long since had foretold that a chieftain-band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Aiêtes’ city faring from Hellas-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the beach of the Thynian coast should make their hawsers fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by these should the Harpies of Zeus be restrained from tormenting at last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So with words of wisdom and love the ancient gladdened each heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere he let them go; but Paraibius suffered he not to depart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But bade him abide with the chieftains, and sent him, making request</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his friend to go to the flock, and to bring the goodliest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sheep unto him. So when to perform his behest he had sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the chieftains gathered there spake Phineus, and lovingly said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, not every man is overweening of mood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither forgetful of kindness; so loyal of heart and so good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is yon man. Hither he came on a day to inquire of his fate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, when never so hard he toiled, sore labouring early and late,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet ever his need grew greater, his poverty waxed alway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With leanness wasting his frame: day followed on evil day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet worse: no respite there was to his weariful pain. But herein</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was this man paying the debt of his father’s ancient sin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For once on the mountains alone the trees of the forest felling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had set at nought the prayers of a Nymph in an oak-tree dwelling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with earnest entreaty she moaned her request, and besought him with tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To spare that trunk which had grown with her growth, wherewith through the years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of long generations her life was bound; but in folly and pride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his youthful arrogance hewed he on: and the Tree-nymph died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore the Wood-maid caused that her death thereafter should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a curse unto him and his children. And I, when he came unto me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew of the ancient sin; and an altar I bade him raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Thynian Nymph, and atonement-victims to give to the blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praying to ’scape from the weird pronounced on his father of yore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, when from the doom of the Goddess deliverance came, never more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgat he me, nor neglected: and sorely against his will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my doors do I send him fain to attend mine afflictions still.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake Agenor’s son; and straightway returned again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friend with fatlings twain from the flock. Rose Jason then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rose the North-wind’s sons at the ancient prophet’s word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eftsoons called they on the name of Apollo the Prophecy-lord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then slew they the sheep on the hearth as sloped the sun to the west.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the younger men of their band made ready the plenteous feast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when they had eaten, they turned to their rest, as each man chose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the hawsers of Argo these, through the mansion in clusters those.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at dawn the Etesian breezes blew, which o’er every land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Equally blow in their season by Zeus’s high command.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Kyrênê, ’tis told, in the meads where Peneios’ waters roll</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pastured her sheep in the olden days; for dear to her soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were her maidenhood and her couch unstained: but, even as she strayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the stream with her flock, did Apollo snatch from the earth the maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Haimonia afar, and mid Chthonian Nymphs did he set her down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where over their Libyan haunts the steeps Myrtosian frown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There did she bear Aristaius, and Phœbus’ son did they call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Haimonia the Shepherd Lord, and the Mighty Hunter withal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the God of his love to a Nymph transformed her, and made her there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Lady of the Land, long-lived: but his child he bare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A babbling infant yet, to be nurtured in Cheiron’s cave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to him, when he grew unto manhood, a bride the Muses gave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cunning in healing they taught him, with prophecy-wisdom they fed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their tender of sheep did they make him, that all their flocks he led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the plain Athamantian of Phthia that pastured, by Othrys’ side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where the sacred streams of the river Apidanus glide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when Sirius glared on the isles of Minos with scorching blaze,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither came to the dwellers therein any respite for many days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this Aristaius they sent, by the Archer-god’s command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To avert the plague; and he left at his father’s behest the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phthia, and dwelt in Kos, and assembled thither the folk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Parrhasia, even the people sprung from Lykaon’s stock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So to Rain-giver Zeus he builded a mighty altar there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he offered sacrifice meet to the star of the fiery glare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hills, and to Zeus himself the son of Kronos; and so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the earth from Zeus the cool Etesian winds yet blow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For forty days: and, or ever the red Dog-star doth rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The priests in Kos unto this day offer him sacrifice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So telleth the tale: and there were the heroes constrained to stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land-bound by the selfsame winds. But the Thynians day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their love for Phineus, brought to them gifts of abundant cheer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereafter unto the Blessèd Twelve did the wanderers rear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the further strand an altar, and victims offered they there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere they entered the sea-swift galley to row: yet forgat not to bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Argo a trembling dove, but Euphêmus clutched her fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his hand, as with terror she shrank and cowered; and so at the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loose from the Thynian land the hawsers twain they cast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet not unmarked of Athênê onward again did they fare:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly her feet hath she set on a cloud light-floating in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which should waft her along, for she caused that the weight divine it bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So seaward she swept to the help of the toilers at the oar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when one roveth afar from his own land⁠—oftentimes thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We men in our hardihood wander, and no land seemeth to us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too far away, but all paths lie within our ken⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he thinketh upon his home, and all in a moment then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him seemeth the track over sea and o’er land thereunto lieth plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the eyes of his soul in his eager pondering thitherward strain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so swiftly the Daughter of Zeus through the welkin hath sped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till her feet on the perilous strand of the coast Bithynian tread.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So when they were come to the narrow gorge of the winding strait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where to right and to left stern cliffs pent in that grim sea-gate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the swirling rush of the surf dashed, bursting up from below,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the ship as she went, and onward in sore dismay did they row.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the thud of the rocks, as each against other they clashed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceaselessly smote on their ears, and thundered the cliffs brine-lashed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even then Euphêmus uprose firm-grasping the dove in his hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on to the prow he strode, and the oarsmen obeyed the command</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Tiphys Hagnias’ son, that they rowed with might and main</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive the Argo betwixt the rocks through the perilous lane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Putting their trust in their strength; and the crags, as asunder they leapt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opening they saw⁠—of all men last⁠—round a bend as they swept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their spirit was melted within them:⁠—but now Euphêmus hath sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flight of the wings of the dove: each man uplifted his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching what now should befall:⁠—on, onward between them, on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew she; but face to face those charging walls of stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came rushing together, and crashed, and the seething brine uproared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vast-volumed like to a cloud; and the madding sea-gulf roared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With an awful voice, and thundered the welkin wide all round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And out of the caverns under the rugged cliffs the sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a hollow rumbling came, as the sea surged inward; and high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the cliffs from the dashing waves did the spurts of the white foam fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship broached-to in the wave-rush: shorn by the rocks was the tip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the dove’s tail-feathers; but onward she flew, by the death-gin’s grip</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unscathed. Loud shouted the oarsmen; and Tiphys cried to them then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To row with their might, for the crags were parting asunder again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for trembling they faltered in rowing, until the indraught caught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship in the strength of its sweep back-swinging; and lo, they were brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt those rocks. Then fell upon all most ghastly dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For destruction that none could escape was hanging above each head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now through the gap wide Pontus to right and to left was beheld:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all unawares at their bows a mighty surge upswelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overbowed like a precipice-frown; and they saw as the green arch gleamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with cowering heads did they shut their eyes⁠—to their souls it seemed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That down on the ship’s whole length it would leap, and overwhelm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, while yet to the rowing she laboured, did Tiphys’ touch on the helm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ease her, and under the keel hath it rolled, as leapt the prow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High hath it lifted the stern, and afar hath it swept her now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the rocks, and the galley ’twixt earth and heaven was tossed on high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Euphêmus strode down the line of the rowers with cheering cry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bend to the oars with their uttermost might: and they tore through the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blades with a shout. And far as a ship to the stroke will leap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even twice so far leapt Argo away, and the tough oars bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like bended bows, such might to the stroke the heroes lent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On-rushing, up-towering, a breaker came, overarched like a cave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But suddenly light as a roller she rode the furious wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forward through yawning gulfs she plunged; but caught was her prow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a whirlpool sea-rush betwixt the Clashers:⁠—on each side now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swaying forward they thundered, and shivered the hull to the coming shock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then did Athênê backward thrust one massy rock</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her left hand, touching their bark with her right to speed her through;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On, like a wingèd arrow ’twixt billow and air she flew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet shorn away was the tip of the galley’s arching stern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the rocks in their clash never-resting. Then did Athênê return</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far up to Olympus soaring, when now their peril was past.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Crags in the selfsame place that moment were rooted fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each hard against other for ever, as fated they were to remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the Blest, when a man in his ship should have passed therethrough unslain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now for the first from dismay blood-curdling did those breathe free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now gazing around on the sky, now o’er the expanse of sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far stretching away; for they weened that from Hades safe they had fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then first of them Tiphys brake that awe-struck hush, and he said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now I deem we have ’scaped it, we and the Argo, in very deed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And herein none other, save only Athênê, hath helped us at need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who breathed into Argo spirit divine, when Argus the wright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knit her with bolts, that she could not be trapped in doom’s despite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Aison’s son, for the hest of thy king no more fear thou,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since a God hath vouchsafed unto us to flee all scatheless now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through yonder rocks: yea, all thy toils which are yet to be done</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall lightly be compassed, as Phineus foretold, Agênor’s son.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he; and forward past the Bithynian land he sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship right on through the midst of the sea. But Jason said⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sad was his voice and low as he answered the hero-chief:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ah, Tiphys, to what end thus wouldst thou hearten me in my grief?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have sinned: with baneful and cureless madness have I transgressed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I ought, in the very hour when Pelias uttered his hest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have straightway refused this Quest, yea, though I were doomed to die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the hands of tormentors, limb from limb hewn pitilessly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But exceeding dread and cares unendurable now be mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With haunting fear as I sail the sea’s chill paths of brine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the ship, and with haunting fear wheresoever we set our feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the land, for that foes evermore on every shore do we meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever, when past is the day, through a night of sighs I wake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even from the hour when first ye gathered for Jason’s sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all things aye taking thought. With a light heart cheerily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou speak’st, who for nought but thine own life needest to care; but I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For mine own care never a jot; but for this man and that man’s bane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for thee, and for other my comrades I bear this burden of pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest haply never I bring you alive unto Hellas again.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, trying the heroes’ souls; but with words of cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouted they: glowed his heart that gallant chiding to hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And again he uplifted his voice, and he hailed that hero-crew:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, your manful spirit hath quickened my courage anew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore, not though through abysses of Hades my way should be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will I suffer that dread shall lay hold on my soul, so steadfast do ye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Abide amid heart-wringing terror⁠—yea, seeing that now through the strait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Clashing Rocks we have sailed, I trow there lieth in wait</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No terror hereafter like unto this, if in truth we obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The counsel of Phineus the seer, as we track the printless way.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he; from words of misgiving their lips thenceforth they refrained:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they fell to the ceaseless labour of rowing; and quickly they gained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rheba the swift-flowing river: Kotône’s height they descried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shortly thereafter past the Headland Dark did they glide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereby was Phyllêis’ outfall, where in the days bygone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the halls of his palace Dipsakus welcomed Athamas’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time from Orchomenus-city he fled, on the winged ram borne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Nymph of the Mead was his mother: the tyrant’s arrogant scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He loathed, but contented beside his father’s streams dwelt he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his mother, and pastured his sheep in the meadows beside the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly they sighted his shrine, and the broad low banks of the stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the plain, and of Kalpê’s deep-flowing waters they caught the gleam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a moment, and passed it by, and still, when the daylight waned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath the stars of the windless night at the tireless oars they strained.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even as ploughing oxen cleaving the rain-soaked soil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labour the furrows adown, and abundant sweat of their toil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streameth from flank and from neck, and aye from beneath the yoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are the tired beasts turning their eyes askance; and as furnace-smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hot gasps snort they the breath from their mouths; and, deep in the clay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrusting their hoofs, at the plough they tug through the livelong day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So toiled those heroes tugging the oars through the brine alway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the dawn divine not yet hath arisen, nor utter night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reigneth, but over the darkness stealeth a faint grey light⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The twilight-tide is it named of slumber-stinted men⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a desolate Thynian island’s haven then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They ran, and with weary toil sore-spent won they to the strand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to them lo, Lêto’s son, coming up from the Libyan land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he fared to the countless folk of the Hyperborean race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Appeared; and his tresses golden-gleaming about his face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever, as onward he moved, in the breezes floated and swung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his left hand held he the silver bow, and his quiver slung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his shoulders was gleaming adown his back: and the isle all o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quaked ’neath his feet, and surged the billow high on the shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then fell on them ’wildered fear as they looked: was none dared turn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His face to gaze with his eyes on the God’s eyes lovely and stern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with heads bowed down to the earth they stood: and onward he passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faring afar through the air to the sea. Then Orpheus at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After long hush spake, and he cried to the hero-chieftains all:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come now, an ye will, this island the Sacred Isle let us call</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Apollo the Dawn-god, seeing at dawning revealed to our eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the isle he hath passed. Such things as we have let us sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shore upbuilding an altar: and if in the days to come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Haimonia-land he vouchsafe us return, safe-speeding us home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with the thighs of hornèd goats will we pay our vow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with sacrifice-steam and libation I bid you propitiate now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The God. Be gracious, O King manifested!⁠—be gracious thou!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So did he counsel: an altar with speed ’gan these uppile</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of shingle, and those through the island wandered, seeking the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If they haply might light on a fawn, or the wild goat’s restless brood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in multitudes seek their pasturage far in the depths of the wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lêto’s son unto these gave booty; and carving out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thighs, on the altar they laid them with fat-folds wrapped about:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they burnt them, hailing Apollo the Lord of the Fair Dayspring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And around the blaze they stood in a wide encompassing ring:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“All hail, fair Healer Apollo! Hail, thou Healer of Bane!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sang: and amidst them Oeagrius’ goodly son hath ta’en</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Bistonian lyre, and uplifted his voice in the clear-ringing lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing how on the rocky flanks of Parnassus once on a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Delphinê the monster the young God slew with his arrow-flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he yet was a beardless youth, rejoicing in locks of light:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be gracious!” he sang, “Unshorn, O King, be thy tresses aye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever unravaged, as Heaven’s will is! One only may lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love-lingering hands thereupon, even Lêto Kôeus’ child.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the daughters of Pleistus oft, the Korykian Nymphs of the wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught up the refrain⁠—“Hail, Healer!” their gladdening echoes ring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So born was the lovely hymn that to Phœbus yet men sing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then, when with the dance and the song they had honoured the God, they swore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the holy libations taking the oath, that evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would stand each one by his fellow, and help in unity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the victims laid they their hands as they spake; and yet may ye see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A temple to gracious Unity there, which their own hands reared</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the day that they took for their wayfaring-fellow the Goddess revered.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And now when the dawn of the third day came, a fresh strong wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the west upsprang, and they left the island-cliffs behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overagainst the mouth of the river Sangarius then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the land exceeding rich of the Mariandynian men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The streams of Lykus, the mere of Anthemoïsia⁠—these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sighted, and ran thereby, and ever the sheets in the breeze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quivered, and all the tackling, as onward they sped their flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at dawn⁠—forasmuch as the wind had fallen asleep in the night⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladly the haven they won of the Acherusian Head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upward it soareth to heaven with cliffs no foot may tread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fronting the sea Bithynian; below it the craggy rocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever lashed by the brine stand rooted: around them with thunder-shocks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever crashes the wallowing surge; and above the turmoil on high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide-spreading planes on the brow of the mountain rest on the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And aback of the headland, and sloped therefrom away from the shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is a glen in a hollow: therein is a cave, even Hades’ Door,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With forest and rocks overroofed, and thereout an icy breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chill-blowing unceasingly up from unfathomed abysses of death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freezeth the dews evermore, neither melteth the glistering rime</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the leaves, till the hour when the sun to his noonday height doth climb.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And o’er that headland grim doth silence never brood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it murmureth ever with sound confused of the booming flood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of leaves that shiver in blasts from the mountain-clefts that blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There also the outfall is of the river Acheron’s flow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the heart of the headland bursting it hurleth its flood to the sea</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eastward, through yawning chasms plunging suddenly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But “Saviour of Sailors’ in days thereafter called they its name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Megaran folk of Nisaia, when seeking a home they came</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Mariandynian land; for deliverance from peril it gave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto them and their ships from the stress of stormy wind and wave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the gorge of the cape Acherusian ran the heroes their prow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seaward-facing abode; for the wind had lulled but now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor long unmarked of Lykus, the lord of the selfsame land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Mariandynian folk, they came, that hero-band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slayers of Amykus, seeing their rumour before them had run:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So a league with the wanderers made they because of the great deed done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for Prince Polydeukes, they hailed him as though of the Gods he were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither flocking from every side; for through many a stormy year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had they warred with the proud Bebrykians, and faced the battle-blast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they went up into the city, and all together they passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Lykus’ palace, and that day through by the meat and the bowl</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all lovingkindness they sat, and with converse gladdened their soul.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Aison’s scion his lineage told, and the names of the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the hero-helpers withal, and the tale of Pelias’ hest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how the women of Lemnos in kindness dealt with them well;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of all that in Kyzikus, land of the Dolian men, befell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to Mysia they came, and to Kios, where Herakles lion-souled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sore loth they forsook; and the words of the Sea-god Glaukus he told;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how they laid the Bebrykian people and Amykus low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of Phineus’ prophecies told he and all his weary woe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how they escaped through the Crags Dark-blue, and beheld on the isle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lêto’s son: and still, as he told all, Lykus the while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearkened in gladness of soul; but with grief did the heart of him ache</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Herakles left behind, and unto them all he spake:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, what a hero’s help ye have lost for the way ye must go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far-sailing to halls of Aiêtes!⁠—myself have beheld him, and know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What manner of man he was; for in Daskylus’ halls did he stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even here in the halls of my sire, when he marched through the Asian land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afoot, that belt of the battle-revelling queen to win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hippolytê: then did he find me with youth’s soft down on my chin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, when Priolaus my brother was unto his grave-mound borne⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who was slain by our Mysian foes, and for whom the people mourn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With exceeding piteous dirges from that day forth⁠—in the lists</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against Titias the strong he stood, and prevailed in the strife of the fists</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over him who amidst of our young men never his match had found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In stature and might: but Herakles dashed his teeth on the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath my father’s sceptre withal the Mysians he bowed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Phrygians, for hard by our marches their fields our foemen ploughed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tribes of Bithynians he smote, and won their land by his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the outfall of Rheba, and unto Kolonê’s height.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Paphlagonians of Pelops yielded, nor faced that foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even all round whom Billaios’ darkling waters flow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came the Bebrykians; and Amykus’ lawless tyranny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Herakles dwelt afar, reft these my possessions from me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long carving out of my land huge cantles, till stretched the line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their bounds to the meads where Hypius’ deep-flowing waters shine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ye made them to pay requital for all: it was not, I wot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by will of the Gods that war by Tyndareus’ son was brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day on Bebrykia’s sons, when their champion giant he slew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore what thanks soever Lykus may render to you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With joy will I render; for meet and right it is that the weak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the strong for their helping arise, by deeds their thanks should speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, Daskylus now will I bid that he be of your company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even my son, and if this man your fellow in wayfaring be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With kindly greeting shall all men hail you, and welcome fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through all your way, till the mouth of the river Thermodon ye gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to Tyndareus’ sons on the Acherusian foreland’s steep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A temple on high will I rear: far off across the deep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall seafarers mark that fane, and to these in prayer shall they call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich fields of the fertile plain will I set apart withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto them, as unto the Gods, without the city-wall.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Even so through the livelong day at the banquet revelled they on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with dawning down to the strand they hied them, in haste to be gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then went with them Lykus, and gifts in their galley to bear gave he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without number, and sent his son, their voyaging comrade to be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There did the doom fate-spoken descend upon Abas’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Idmon, in soothsaying peerless: but safety for him was there none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his soothsaying lore, for that now must he die by the doom decreed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it chanced that there lay in a reedy river’s water-mead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cooling his flanks and his mighty belly wallowed in mire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wild boar gleaming-tusked, so baleful a monster and dire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That of him were the meadow-haunting Nymphs themselves adread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man knew his lair; alone in the fen wide-stretching he fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it chanced unto Abas’ son o’er the marshy rises to fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the plain, and the beast on a sudden, forth of his unseen lair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High-leaping out of the reed-bed, gashed in his sidelong rush</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His thigh, that the sinews were severed, and snapped was the bone by the tush.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one sharp cry to the earth he fell, and with answering shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His comrades ran to the stricken; and Peleus in haste thrust out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his hunting-spear, as the murderous monster fled to the fen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turned he, and charged full on them; but Idas stabbed him then,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And harshly screaming he fell impaled on the keen spear-head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There on the earth as he lay, unheeded they left him dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But their friend to the galley in death-throes gasping his comrades bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sore grieved: but he died in their arms or ever they reached the shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then from their voyaging stayed they, they cared not now to depart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their dead friend’s burial turned they in heaviness of heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For three whole days they wailed, and their dead, when the fourth day broke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did they bury as one of the princes; and Lykus and all his folk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had part in the woeful rites; and victims of sheep not a few,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As meet and right for the dead it is, by his grave they slew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a barrow that standeth yet unto this man there did they raise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a token is there, to be seen by the men of the unborn days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A galley’s roller of olive-wood; into leaf doth it break</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a little below Acherusia’s height: and⁠—if I may speak</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This too by the power of the Muses that stirreth within my breast⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Bœotian men and Nisaian Apollo spake his behest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worship to him as unto their city’s protector to pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And around that ancient olive a city’s foundations to lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by this is tradition dim, and they render the honour-meed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto one Agamestor, and not unto Idmon, Aiolus’ seed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now who was the next that died?⁠—for the heroes again in grief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another earth-mound heaped for another perished chief:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, there be memorials twain of the wanderers yet high-reared.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now telleth the tale how Tiphys the Hagniad died; for his weird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was to voyage no further thereafter; but him, far away from his home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short sickness hushed into sleep, the endless sleep of the tomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While yet were the death-rites rendered to Abas’ son by the folk:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grief unendurable seized them for this new ruin-stroke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and when hard by the seer him too they had buried there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shore of the sea did they cast them adown in utter despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolled in their mantles from head to foot, all hushed: no part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had meat nor drink in their thoughts; but in bitterness of heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They spake not, for hope of returning was dead in each man’s breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for grief had they gone no further, had there made end of the Quest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that Hêrê enkindled exceeding courage within the soul</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ankaius, whom Astypaleia, where Imbrasus’ waters roll,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bare to the Sea-god, a man most deft in the steering of ships.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now unto Peleus he turned him, and spake with eager lips:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Is it well done, Aiakus’ son, that, forgetting the great work, we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On an alien shore should linger and linger?⁠—I, even he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Jason brought on the Quest of the Fleece from Parthenia afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have knowledge of ships⁠—yea, even beyond my cunning in war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore, as touching the plight of our ship, no whit fear thou.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, others in steering deft came hitherward with us, I trow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whomsoever of these at the helm we set, no hurt shall befall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our seafaring. Haste then, and unto our fellows tell forth all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unto the high emprise arouse them with heartening word.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he; the soul of the other with gladness exceeding was stirred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No whit did he tarry, but straight in the midst of them all did he say,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ho, friends!⁠—why cherish we thus a bootless sorrow for aye?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I ween these twain by the doom first drawn with their life’s lot died:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in this our array there be found with us other helmsmen beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, many an one: let us put them to proof: make we no stay;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rouse ye unto the deed, and cast your griefs away.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But in helpless despair unto him did the son of Aison say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Aiakus’ son, these helmsmen of thine⁠—now where be they?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they which concerning their cunning therein once vaunted loud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even these yet more than I with vexation of spirit are bowed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For us then, as for the dead, ill doom doth mine heart foretell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose lot shall be never to win to the town of Aiêtes the fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, neither ever again to pass through the grim sea-gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the land of Hellas returning; but now shall an evil fate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As we wax old deedless, enshroud us nameless and fameless here.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake: but Ankaius eagerly proffered himself to steer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea-swift ship; for within him the power of the Goddess was strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Erginus and Nauplius then, and Euphêmus forth from the throng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strode, eager all for the helm: but their comrades drew back these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that none would they have but Ankaius to guide them over the seas.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So then on the twelfth day hied them adown the Argo’s crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At dawn; for the West-wind now, the mighty wafter, blew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speedily out of the Acheron’s mouth with the oars they passed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they shook the broad sail forth to the wind, and far and fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With outspread canvas cleaving the leagues of summer wave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the outfall of Kallichorus the river swiftly they drave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The place where the child Nysaian of Zeus, as the tale doth tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When, leaving the tribes of the Indians, in Thêbê he came to dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held revel, and dances in front of the cave did the God array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein, through the nights unsmiling, in hallowed slumber he lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore the people called it the River of Dances Fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cavern the Bedchamber, seeing a God once slumbered there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereafter espied they the barrow of Sthenelus, Aktor’s son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who, when from valorous battle against the Amazon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was turning aback⁠—for with Herakles thither to war had he hied⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By an arrow was smitten, and there on the surf-lashed sea-strand died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet for a space did they sail on thence; for Persephonê, won</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his prayers and tears, sent forth the spirit of Aktor’s son</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A moment to gaze upon men of passions like to his own.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he mounted the crest of his barrow: on Argo looked he down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even such to behold as when to the war he went. On his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beautiful helm four-crested flashed with its plume blood-red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then down into blackness of darkness returned he: they looked thereon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And marvelled. Then by the word of prophecy Ampykus’ son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mopsus, caused them to land, and to pay drink-offerings due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So furled they the sail in haste, and the hawsers forth they threw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there on the strand round Sthenelus’ grave-mound gathered they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink-offerings they poured, and the fatlings of sacrifice did they slay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, besides the libations, an altar they built, laying thighs on the blaze</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Apollo the Saviour of Ships; and his lyre did Orpheus upraise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dedicate; wherefore the “Lyre” from that day called they the place.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then straight, when the wind blew strong, did they board the galley again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they dropped the sail from the yard, and the feet thereof did they strain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either hand with the sheets; and over the sea did she fly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift-racing, as when some hawk through the welkin soaring high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the breeze committeth his wings, and is borne fast: onward sweeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stirreth them not, on restful pinions in mid-heaven sleeping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo, by the streams of Parthenius’ seaward-murmuring water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most softly-sliding of rivers, they passed, where Lêto’s Daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What time from the hunting she cometh, ere up to the heaven she go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its lovely ripples cooleth her limbs from the summer-glow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then through the night-tide onward and onward unresting they sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Past Sêsamus, past the long Erythinian steeps they fled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Krôbialus and by Krômne, Kytôrus the forest-crowned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as the sun’s shafts glanced o’er the waters, swept they around</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Karambis; and still by an endless strand the oars they plied</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the livelong day, and on through the night, when the daylight died.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the shore of Assyria they landed, where Zeus to Sinopê, the child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Asôpus, had given a home. By his own rash promise beguiled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zeus’ self bestowed on the maiden the gift of her maidenhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he longed for her love, and he promised that, whatsoever she would,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would give her her heart’s desire, and he sealed the pledge with his nod:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she in her subtlety asked her maidenhood of the God.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in like wise made she a mock of Apollo, whose soul was fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her couch, and of Halys the river withal. Nor did any man gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His desire, in the arms of love to embrace her, and humble her pride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now there did noble Trikkaian Deïmachus’ sons abide⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even three, Deïleon, Autolykus, Phlogius withal, were these⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the day when they wandered away from the host of Herakles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these, when they marked draw near the warrior-chiefs’ array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went shoreward to meet them, and told them in all truth who were they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither willed they there to abide any longer, but fared with the crew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Argo, so soon as the cloud-dispelling south-wind blew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in their company went they borne by the breeze swift-blowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Halys the river they left, and Iris beside him flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the river-delta land of Assyria: the selfsame day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rounded the headland that sheltered the Amazons’ harbour-bay.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Melanippê, Arêtus’ child, forth-faring, by ambuscade</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Herakles there was caught, and her sister Hippolytê paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her ransom the Belt of renown, the splendour-gleaming band:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the hero sent her back, and she gat no hurt of his hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the harbour that beareth her name, where seaward Thermodon pours</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran they ashore, for that contrary now was the wind to their course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That river⁠—on earth there is not his like; there is none that doth spread</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the land so many streams from his fountain-head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There should lack but four of a hundred, if one should tell them o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each after each, and from one true fountain do all these pour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down from the mountains high to the plains it sendeth its rills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the heights which be called, men say, the Amazonian Hills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence over the hilly country inland-straying they flow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever onward, albeit their paths in manifold windings go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This way and that evermore, wheresoever on low-lying ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They may light, so roll they along; and this one afar shall be found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that one anear; and nameless many an one is lost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swallowed up in the sands; and a blended remnant of all that host</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into perilous Pontus plunge with arching crests high-tossed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, there as they tarried, in battle against the Amazon horde</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had they closed, and in that grim strife had blood been as water outpoured;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all ungentle the Amazons are, neither have they regard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto justice, the terrible ones who the plain Doiantian ward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the deeds of the War-god they love, and outrage of tyrannous scorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the daughters of Ares they are, of the Nymph Harmonia born:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she bare to the Man-destroyer the battle-revelling maids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When their couch was spread mid the folds of Alkmonian forest-glades:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But again from Zeus ’gan blow the breath of the fair south-wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So sped by the blast they left the rounded foreland behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the Themiskyreian Amazons yet were arming for war:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in one great city assembled they dwelt not, but sundered afar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their fellows throughout the land were the tribes of them parted in three;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the one place Themiskyreians, whose queen was Hippolytê</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In that old time; and there the Lykastians dwelt, and anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dart-hurling Chadisians yonder. The next day sped they on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at nightfall unto the land of the Chalyban men they won.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That folk drive never the ploughing oxen afield: no part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have they in the planting of fruit that as honey is sweet to the heart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither lead they the pasturing flocks over meadows a-glitter with dew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the ribs of the stubborn earth for the treasure of iron they hew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by merchandise of the same do they live: never dawning broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing respite of toil unto them, but ever midst mirk of smoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flame at the forge are they moiling and plying the weary stroke.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Round the headland of Zeus the All-begetter swept they then;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And safely they sped by the land of the Tibarenian men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a woman in that land beareth a child to her lord, on his bed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth her husband cast him adown, and he groaneth with close-swathed head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in anguish of travail, the while the woman with tender care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doth nurse him and feed, and for him the child-birth bath doth prepare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sacred Mountain thereafter, and that land passed they by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein the Mossynœcians dwell amid mountains high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their towers of timber goodly-wrought, and they call the same</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mossyni,” wherefrom moreover the nation hath gotten its name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange is the justice of these, and customs uncouth have they.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatsoe’er we be wont to do before men in the sight of the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the market-stead, all this they perform their houses within;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whatso we do in our chambers apart, they account it not sin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without, in the midst of the streets of their city, to do unblamed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No modesty have they in love, but as rooting swine unshamed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No whit abashed for the eyes of beholders that stand thereby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the earth for their bed of love with their women unwedded they lie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their loftiest block-house sitteth their king, and holdeth his court,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decreeing his righteous judgments to them that thither resort.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah, luckless wight!⁠—if perchance in his sentence he swerve from the right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto prison they hale him, therein to fast till falleth the night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These passed they by, and well-nigh overagainst the shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Isle of Ares they cleft them a path with unresting oars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the livelong day, for the gentle breeze in the gloaming died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then all in a moment one of the War-god’s birds they espied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which haunt that isle, through the welkin darting high overhead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And behold, his pinions he shook, and down on the ship as she sped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A feather keen hath he shot: to the leftward shoulder it sprang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Oïleus: he dropped from his hands his oar at the sudden pang</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the stroke, and they marvelled all when the feather-arrow they saw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the shaft from the flesh did his rowing-mate Eribôtes draw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he bound up the wound; for his baldric-band he unclasped, that bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sword-sheath hanging beside him. Sweeping on through the air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came another of those fell birds: but already the bow was bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the hero Klytius, Eurytus’ son: from the string hath he sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A swift-flying arrow against that fowl, and the shaft struck home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down whirling beside the swift ship splashed the bird in the foam.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then cried Amphidamas Aleüs’ son, and thus spake he:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nigh to us now is the Island of Ares: ye know it, who see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yon fowl of ravin; and little shall arrows avail us, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To win us a peaceful landing thereon; but contrive we now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some other device for our help, if indeed we be minded to land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering Phineus’ word, and the sightless seer’s command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For not great Herakles’ self, to Arcadia-land when he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Availed with his arrows to drive away those birds that swam</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Stymphalian mere: yea, I with mine eyes beheld that thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he stood on a crag exceeding high, loud-clattering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With clash and clang in his hands his brazen battle-gear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And far away did they flee wild-screaming in panic fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore contrive we now even such device as his⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, I will speak it, who heretofore have thought upon this:⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set we upon our heads our helmets of lofty crest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And changing about in turn let the half of us row, and the rest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With polished lances and bucklers fence the galley about;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all with one accord upraise ye a mighty shout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the birds by the noise may be scared, by the wild unwonted cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they look on our nodding crests and the bright spears tossed on high.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if through the storm of their shafts to the island itself we shall win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with clashing of brazen bucklers raise ye a mighty din.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and good in the sight of them all that counsel seemed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the heads of the heroes straightway the brazen helmets gleamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Terribly flashing; above them tossed the plumes blood-red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the half of them now in their turn the galley with oars on-sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with lances and shields did the rest for Argo a covering raise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when with tiling a man hath roofed his dwelling-place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a beauty upon his abode and a fence from the rain thereto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And close-set each after each are they ranged in order due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so did they lock their shields, so roofed they the galley o’er.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when from a warrior-throng upriseth the onset-roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the ranks are sweeping on, when the squadrons in battle close,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so from the galley on high to the welkin the shout of them rose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now none of the birds yet saw they: but when, as they touched the strand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the island, they clashed on their bucklers, straightway on every hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the earth by tens of thousands uprose they in sudden dread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as when by the Son of Kronos the hail thick-falling is shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the clouds on a town and its dwellings; the house-abiders the while,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they hearken the clatter that rattles unceasing on timber and tile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untroubled are sitting: the stormy tide hath smitten the roof</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not unforeseen; long since had they made all tempest-proof:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So on the men thick-showering feather-shafts did they pour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they darted on high o’er the sea to the hills on the farther shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now what was the purpose of Phineus in bidding that hero-array</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land on the War-god’s isle? What help against the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their need were they destined to win of their tarrying there on the way?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sons of Phrixus unto Orchomenus voyaging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been sent from Aia forth by Kytaian Aiêtes the king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a galley of Kolchis they sailed, that the measureless wealth might be theirs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their sire, for in death had he so commanded these his heirs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And exceeding nigh that day to the isle had they drawn; but lo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The might of the wind of the north did Zeus awaken to blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marking with rain the watery path of Arcturus the star.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet through the day-tide he stirred but the leaves on the mountains afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breathing but lightly over the uttermost ends of the sprays:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at night on the sea he descended, a tempest-Titan, to raise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The surge with his blasts wild-shrieking: a black mist shrouded the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never the gleam of a star might the mariners’ ken descry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the clouds, but over the sea’s face brooded murky gloom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sons of Phrixus quaking for fear of a horrible doom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were helplessly hurled o’er the surges, and drenched with the flying spume.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sail by the might of the blast was snatched away, and crashed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their ship’s hull, shattered in twain by the breakers thereover that dashed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then by the Gods’ own prompting they clutched, and as one man clung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those four to a mighty spar⁠—for that many an one had been flung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide from the scattered wreck⁠—firm-knit by the strong bolts’ clasp;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on to the isle, evermore but a little beyond death’s grasp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The waves and the sweep of the tempest bare them in misery.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then burst forth rain: no tongue could tell it⁠—it rained on the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the island; and overagainst the island the floods of it fell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over all the land where the lawless Mossynœcians dwell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And along with the massy beam the sweep of the surges bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sons of Phrixus on to the island’s rocky shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the black dark night. But the floods of Zeus-descended rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceased with the dawn: and they met full soon, those companies twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Argus first found voice, and to Argo’s crew spake he:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“We beseech you by All-beholder Zeus, whosoever ye be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of men, to have mercy and succour us now in our helplessness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For buffeted long have we been on the sea by the rough winds’ stress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till sundered and shattered the beams of our crazy galley were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By your knees we entreat you then, if ye haply will hearken our prayer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cover our nakedness now, and to take us whither ye go:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As youths taking pity on youths, compassionate ye our woe!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O reverence ye the strangers and suppliants for Zeus’s sake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is Lord of the stranger and suppliant⁠—yea, both names we take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even strangers and suppliants of Zeus; and over us all is his eye.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But with heedful questioning then did Aison’s son reply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he weened that fulfilment of Phineus’ prophecy now was nigh:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“All these will we give straightway with kindly heart and hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But prithee now answer me truth, and tell how name ye the land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherein ye be dwellers;⁠—for what need thus have ye sailed the sea?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And your names of renown tell out, and the lineage whereof ye be.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then Argus, as one in despairing wretchedness, answered low:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How Phrixus the Aiolid came unto Aia from Hellas, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yourselves have certainly heard, have heard ere this the renown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phrixus, who came on a day to Aiêtes’ fortress-town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bestriding the ram which Hermes created all of gold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, and the fleece thereof this day may ye yet behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the ram by the beast’s own counsel a sacrifice did he give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Kronion the Fugitives’ Zeus. And him did Aiêtes receive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his palace, and gave him to wife his daughter Chalkiopê,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor for gifts of wooing he asked, in the joy of his heart and the glee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of these twain we be the children; but Phrixus our father hath died,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old man stricken with years, in Aiêtes’ halls of pride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And straightway we, giving heed to the word that our father spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Orchomenus journey, Athamas’ goods in possession to take.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if, as thy word was, thou wouldst that our names be made known unto thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, Kytisôrus is this man named, and Phrontis he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yonder is Melas, and Argus me myself shall ye call.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He spake, and for this forgathering glad were the heroes all:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they ministered unto them, marvelling much: but Jason again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake as was meet and right, for his heart of the tidings was fain:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo now, of a surety kinsmen ye are of my sire, which have prayed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with merciful hearts we would look upon this your affliction, and aid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For of one blood, even brethren, Kretheus and Athamas were;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Kretheus’ grandson am I, with these my companions who fare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the selfsame Hellas, and unto Aiêtes’ city I sail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of all these things to commune shall another time avail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now put raiment upon you: it came to pass, I trow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By devising of Gods that ye came to mine hands in your sore need so.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and out of the ship he gave them raiment to don.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all together now unto Ares’ fane are they gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sacrificing of sheep, and in all haste round about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The altar they ranged them, which stood that roofless fane without,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An altar of pebbles: within was a mighty stone upreared,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A holy thing, which of yore the Amazons all revered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it was not their wont, from the further strand when they came o’er the deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On this same altar to burn in sacrifice oxen nor sheep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But horses they slew, and for this great herds were they wont to keep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There sacrificed they, and they ate of the flesh of the victims slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Aison’s son in their midst uprose, and he spake yet again:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Zeus’ self upon all things looketh, nor ever escape we his ken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a surety, such as be god-revering and righteous men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even so your father delivered he out of the murderous hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a stepdame, and gave to him measureless wealth in a far-away land:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And even so you also scatheless again did he save</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the baleful storm. Now in this ship, whithersoever ye crave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This way or that, may ye fare; or aback unto Aia’s shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the wealthy city that godlike Orchomenus builded of yore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our ship did Athênê fashion, and clave her beams with the brass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Pelion’s crest, and her fellow-craftsman our Argus was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that your galley was shattered, and whelmed in ruining surge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere nigh to the rocks ye came, the which in the wild sea-gorge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each against other the livelong day are clashing amain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But go to now, be ye helpers with us; for lo, we be fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bring that Fleece of Gold to the land of Hellas again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be our voyaging guides. Lo, thus do I sail to atone for their deed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who would sacrifice Phrixus, and brought Zeus’ wrath upon Aiolus’ seed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he exhorting, and ceased; but with horror they heard that thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they deemed they should find Aiêtes nowise a gentle king</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who would win that Fleece of the Ram. Then Argus spake the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vexation of spirit that these unto suchlike quest should be stirred:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O friends, so far as availeth our strength, no whit at all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our help shall fail you at need, what trial soever befall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But terribly armed is Aiêtes with murderous cruelty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore I dread exceedingly thither to fare oversea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he vaunteth himself the Sun-god’s seed, and around him dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Kolchian tribes untold. In the awful onset-yell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in giant strength, might he match him with Ares’ self in the fray.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, nay, not easy it is to take that Fleece away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Aiêtes, so mighty a serpent around and about it is coiled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deathless and sleepless. The Earth brought forth that dragon-child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid Caucasus’ glens, where the Rock Typhonian standeth: they say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Typhon, smitten by levin-bolts of Zeus, in the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When against Kronion he lifted his brawny hands in fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dropped from his head hot-gushing the gore, and in such ill plight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hills and the Plain Nisaian he came, and to this day there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Neath the waters whelmed doth he lie of the dark Serbonian mere.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and many a face of them that heard grew white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know what manner of emprise was this. But spake forthright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peleus, and answered with words of gallant chiding, and said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nay, good my friend, not thus let thy spirit be over-adread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For that not so lacking in prowess be we, that our hearts should fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make trial of manhood against Aiêtes in battle-gear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nay, but I trow we also have somewhat of cunning in war</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thitherward fare; for by blood of the kin of the Blessèd we are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If therefore in all lovingkindness he yield not the Fleece of Gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little, I ween, shall avail him his Kolchian tribes untold.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In such wise each unto other they spake, and in such wise replied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they turned to their rest, fulfilled of the feast of the eventide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at dawn, when they wakened from slumber, a light wind softly blew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they hoised up the sail: in the breeze of the morning the canvas drew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And away from the War-god’s Island sped they far and fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now at the falling of night by Philyra’s island they passed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Kronos, Ouranos’ son, what time in Olympus he reigned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the Titans, and Zeus yet a babe in the Cretan Cave was sustained</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In life by the priests, the Curêtes of Ida⁠—with Philyra lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he baffled Rheia’s watch; but the Goddess amidst of their play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came suddenly on them: and Kronos leapt from the dalliance-bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And away in the form of a steed of tossing mane he sped.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Ocean’s daughter forsook that land and folk in her shame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unto the long Pelasgian ridges Philyra came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Cheiron the monster, the half of him horse, but otherwhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goodly to see as a God, for a pledge of love she bare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thence past the Makronian people, and past the far-stretching land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Becheirans they ran, past overweening Sapeirans’ strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And past the Byzêrans thereafter; for forward cleaving the seas</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went rushing the prow evermore, on-borne by the gentle breeze.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to them, as they sped by, opened a Pontic gulf cleft deep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lo, the Caucasian mountains’ precipice-wall rose steep⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheer cliffs; and Prometheus there, with his limbs to the rough rocks gripped</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By brazen gyves, whose knots no writhings have riven nor slipped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed with his liver an eagle that aye swooped back on the prey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High over their mast at even a whir and a rush heard they;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anigh to the clouds they beheld it: yet even from that far height</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did it shake the sail with the fanning of those vast pinions’ flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the form and the measure thereof was like no fowl of the air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as polished oars most huge its swift-swaying wing-feathers were.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor long thereafter they heard an exceeding bitter cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As torn was Prometheus’ liver, and rang the vault of the sky</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his screaming, until again from the mountain darting back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They marked where the ravening eagle sped on the selfsame track.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at nightfall, by guidance of Argus, the broad-flowing stream did they gain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phasis, and there was the uttermost bourne of the Pontic main.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then straightway the sail they furled, and the yard-arm let they fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stowed in the mast-trough then; and the mast unstepped they withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lowered in haste, till it lay along: then rowed they fast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the river’s mighty stream; round the prow as they passed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He surged as he yielded them way; and they had on the leftward hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High Caucasus now, and the city Kytaian of Aia-land;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to rightward the plain and the holy grove of the War-god lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where keepeth the serpent watch and ward on the Fleece alway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it hangeth amidst of the thick-leaved boughs of an oak outspread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Aison’s son himself from a golden chalice shed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the river libations of sweet unmingled wine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Earth, to the Gods of the land, to the Spirits of Heroes divine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which had died, and with bowed knees prayed them their sorrowless help to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of their grace, and with welcome propitious the hawsers of Argo receive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then straightway Ankaios spake the word to his fellows, and cried:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo now, to the Kolchian land have we won, where the waters glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Phasis:⁠—the time is come for counsel, to choose our part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If with soft words now we shall make assay of Aiêtes’ heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if other endeavour perchance shall avail us in this our need.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So spake he, and Jason thereon commanded, by Argus’ rede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a backwater leaf-overshadowed to run the galley aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to warp her up to the anchor-stone, off-shore to ride:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the place was anigh to them then. So slept they there through the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soon to their longing eyes appeared the dawning’s light.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
